A predicament mystification diddling the angel of the odd mellonta tauta the duc de l'omelette.
Loss of breath the man that was used up.
A tale of jerusalem the sphinx hop frog the man of the crowd.
The poetic principle old english poetry poems preface poems of later life the raven.
Ulalume to helen annabel lee.
An enigma for annie to f mdash mdash .
To frances s. osgood eldorado.
To marie louise to marie louise the city in the sea.
Notes poems of manhood lenore to one in paradise.
The devil in the belfry diddling the duc de l'omelette.
The man that was used up.
Ms. found in a bottle the masque of the red death.
The oval portrait philosophy of furniture.
The city in the sea.
An enigma to f mdash mdash .
To frances s. osgood to helen to marie louise to marie louise the raven.
Poems of manhood the coliseum.
Dream land the haunted palace.
Hymn lenore to one in paradise.
Al aaraaf a dream dreams evening star fairy land the happiest day.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.
Project gutenberg is a registered trademark.
Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change.
Many small donations are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the irs.
U.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses.
General information about project gutenberg tm electronic works.
Thus, we do not necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
The heyne socin text and glossary have been closely followed.
Occasionally a deviation has been made, but always for what seemed good and sufficient reason.
The translator does not aim to be an editor.
This work is addressed to two classes of readers.
From both of these alike the translator begs sympathy and co operation.
The anglo saxon scholar he hopes to please by adhering faithfully to the original.
Some have given us prose versions of what we believe to be a great poem.
The cadences closely resemble those used by browning in some of his most striking poems.
End rhyme has been used occasionally internal rhyme, sporadically.
Both have some warrant in anglo saxon poetry.
What gummere calls the rime giver has been studiously kept viz.
Alternate alliteration is occasionally used as in the original.
No two accented syllables have been brought together, except occasionally after a cæsural pause.
Several of his types, however, constantly occur e.g.
A and a variant b and a variant a variant of d e .
Anacrusis gives further variety to the types used in the translation.
The parallelisms of the original have been faithfully preserved.
The effort has been made to give a decided flavor of archaism to the translation.
All words not in keeping with the spirit of the poem have been avoided.
The joy of king and retainers is, however, of short duration.
Grendel, the monster, is seized with hateful jealousy.
Oft and anon he goes to the joyous building, bent on direful mischief.
For twelve years he persecutes hrothgar and his vassals.
He resolves to crush the fell monster and relieve the aged king.
With fourteen chosen companions, he sets sail for dane land.
Reaching that country, he soon persuades hrothgar of his ability to help him.
The hours that elapse before night are spent in beer drinking and conversation.
All retire to rest, beowulf, as it were, sleeping upon his arms.
Grendel comes, the great march stepper, bearing god's anger.
He seizes and kills one of the sleeping warriors.
Then he advances towards beowulf.
A fierce and desperate hand to hand struggle ensues.
No arms are used, both combatants trusting to strength and hand grip.
Hrothgar and his retainers are lavish of gratitude and of gifts.
Grendel's mother, however, comes the next night to avenge his death.
She is furious and raging.
After traveling through the waters many hours, he meets her near the sea bottom.
She drags him to her den.
There he sees grendel lying dead.
Joy is renewed at heorot.
Congratulations crowd upon the victor.
Hrothgar weeps and laments at his departure.
When the hero arrives in his own land, higelac treats him as a distinguished guest.
He is the hero of the hour.
Beowulf subsequently becomes king of his own people, the geats.
Beowulf determines to kill him.
In the ensuing struggle both beowulf and the dragon are slain.
The grief of the geats is inexpressible.
They determine, however, to leave nothing undone to honor the memory of their lord.
A great funeral pyre is built, and his body is burnt.
Beowulf is our first great epic.
It is an epitomized history of the life of the teutonic races.
My special thanks are due to professors francis a.
March and james a. harrison, for advice, sympathy, and assistance.
Abbreviations used in the notes.
H. and s. harrison and sharp.
A heroic poem of the eighth century.
Conybeare, j.j. illustrations of anglo saxon poetry.
Full latin translation, and some passages translated into english blank verse.
Ettmuller, l. beowulf, stabreimend übersetzt.
Beowulf an anglo saxon poem, and the fight at finnsburg.
An accurate line for line translation, using alliteration occasionally, and sometimes assuming a metrical cadence.
Dichtungen der angelsachsen, stabreimend übersetzt.
Beovulf, poema epico anglo sassone del vii.
Heyne, m. a translation in iambic measures.
The anglo saxon poems of beowulf, the traveller's song, and the battle of finnsburg.
The second edition contains a prose translation of beowulf.
Beowulf, translated into modern rhymes.
An extract from beowulf, with latin translation.
Schaldmose, f. beowulf og scopes widsith, to angelsaxiske digte.
De danorum rebus gestis secul.
English translation in short lines, generally containing two stresses.
Wackerbarth, a.d. beowulf, translated into english verse.
Wickberg, r. beowulf, en fornengelsk hjeltedikt, öfersatt.
Von wolzogen, h. beowulf, in alliterative measures.
Zinsser, g. der kampf beowulfs mit grendel.
Confidential friend of king hrothgar.
Son of scyld, the founder of the dynasty of scyldings.
Father of healfdene, and grandfather of hrothgar.
The hero of the poem.
Sprung from the stock of geats, son of ecgtheow.
A hero from his youth.
Has the strength of thirty men.
Engages in a swimming match with breca.
Goes to the help of hrothgar against the monster grendel.
Vanquishes grendel and his mother.
Afterwards becomes king of the geats.
Late in life attempts to kill a fire spewing dragon, and is slain.
Is buried with great honors.
Beowulf's opponent in the famous swimming match.
A people ruled by breca.
A famous collar once owned by the brosings.
Progenitor of grendel and other monsters.
A warrior of the hugs, killed by beowulf.
Subjects of scyld and his descendants, and hence often called scyldings.
Father of unferth, who taunts beowulf.
Father of beowulf, the hero of the poem.
A widely known wægmunding warrior.
After slaying heatholaf, a wylfing, he flees his country.
A king of the danes before scyld.
Sister of hrothgar, and probably wife of ongentheow, king of the swedes.
A promontory in geat land, under which took place beowulf's last encounter.
Son of ohthere and brother of eanmund.
Son of ohthere and brother of eadgils.
The reference to these brothers is vague, and variously understood.
The geatish king, heardred, is slain by one of the brothers, probably eanmund.
A gothic king, from whom hama took away the famous brosinga mene.
Son of offa and thrytho, king and queen of the angles.
King of the north frisians and the jutes.
At his court takes place the horrible slaughter in which the danish general, hnæf, fell.
Later on, finn himself is slain by danish warriors.
The country to which beowulf was driven by the currents in his swimming match.
Son and nephew of king sigemund, whose praises are sung in xiv.
Introduced occasionally in referring to the death of higelac.
A part of them are ruled by finn.
Some of them were engaged in the struggle in which higelac was slain.
Married to ingeld, a heathobard prince.
King of the heathobards, and father of ingeld.
The race to which the hero of the poem belongs.
Also called weder geats, or weders, war geats, sea geats.
They are ruled by hrethel, hæthcyn, higelac, and beowulf.
Named in connection with the danes and swedes.
A monster of the race of cain.
Dwells in the fens and moors.
Is furiously envious when he hears sounds of joy in hrothgar's palace.
Causes the king untold agony for years.
Is finally conquered by beowulf, and dies of his wound.
His hand and arm are hung up in hrothgar's hall heorot.
A dane of hnæf's party.
Branch of the danes to which hnæf belonged.
Takes the brosinga mene from eormenric.
Father of higelac's queen, hygd.
Son of hrethel and brother of higelac.
Kills his brother herebeald accidentally.
Is slain at ravenswood, fighting against ongentheow.
The race to which queen wealhtheow belonged.
A kinsman of garmund, perhaps nephew.
Takes command on the fall of hnæf.
Eldest son of hrethel, the geatish king, and brother of higelac.
Killed by his younger brother hæthcyn.
A danish king of a dynasty before the scylding line.
Was a source of great sorrow to his people.
Referred to as uncle of heardred, but otherwise unknown.
Another name for the franks.
Grandson of scyld and father of hrothgar.
Ruled the danes long and well.
Son of higelac and hygd, king and queen of the geats.
Succeeds his father, with beowulf as regent.
Is slain by the sons of ohthere.
Race of lombards, of which froda is king.
A wylfing warrior slain by beowulf's father.
Elder brother of hrothgar, and surnamed 'weoroda ræswa,' prince of the troopers.
The great mead hall which king hrothgar builds.
It is invaded by grendel for twelve years.
Finally cleansed by beowulf, the geat.
It is called heort on account of the hart antlers which decorate it.
Wife of finn, daughter of hoce, and related to hnæf, probably his sister.
Leader of a branch of the danes called half danes.
Killed in the struggle at finn's castle.
Killed by grendel just before beowulf grappled with that monster.
Father of hildeburg and probably of hnæf.
King of the geats, father of higelac, and grandfather of beowulf.
Another name for the danes.
A promontory in geat land, near which ohthere's sons made plundering raids.
Marries wealhtheow, a helming lady.
Has two sons and a daughter.
Is a typical teutonic king, lavish of gifts.
A devoted liegelord, as his lamentations over slain liegemen prove.
Also very appreciative of kindness, as is shown by his loving gratitude to beowulf.
Probably a son of halga, younger brother of hrothgar.
Certainly on terms of close intimacy in hrothgar's palace.
Unferth's sword, lent to beowulf.
A race in alliance with the franks and frisians at the time of higelac's fall.
A frisian warrior, probably general of the hetwars.
Gives hengest a beautiful sword.
King of the geats, uncle and liegelord of beowulf, the hero of the poem.
His second wife is the lovely hygd, daughter of hæreth.
The son of their union is heardred.
Is slain in a war with the hugs, franks, and frisians combined.
Beowulf is regent, and afterwards king of the geats.
Wife of higelac, and daughter of hæreth.
There are some indications that she married beowulf after she became a widow.
Son of the heathobard king, froda.
Marries hrothgar's daughter, freaware, in order to reconcile the two peoples.
Name sometimes applied to finn's people.
Name of a famous sword presented to hengest by hun.
A frankish king, probably engaged in the war in which higelac was slain.
King of the angles, and son of garmund.
Marries the terrible thrytho who is so strongly contrasted with hygd.
Son of ongentheow, king of the swedes.
He is father of eanmund and eadgils.
King of sweden, of the scylfing dynasty.
Married, perhaps, elan, daughter of healfdene.
The forest near which hæthcyn was slain.
Applied to scyld, and meaning 'son of scef.
Founder of the dynasty to which hrothgar, his father, and grandfather belonged.
He dies, and his body is put on a vessel, and set adrift.
He goes from daneland just as he had come to it in a bark.
They are also called honor scyldings, victory scyldings, war scyldings, etc.
A swedish royal line to which wiglaf belonged.
Son of wæls, and uncle and father of fitela.
His struggle with a dragon is related in connection with beowulf's deeds of prowess.
Grandfather of higelac, and father of hrethel.
People of sweden, ruled by the scylfings.
Wife of offa, king of the angles.
Known for her fierce and unwomanly disposition.
She is introduced as a contrast to the gentle hygd, queen of higelac.
Son of ecglaf, and seemingly a confidential courtier of hrothgar.
Taunts beowulf for having taken part in the swimming match.
Lends beowulf his sword when he goes to look for grendel's mother.
In the ms. sometimes written hunferth .
Another name for geats or wedergeats.
A fabulous smith mentioned in this poem and in other old teutonic literature.
The people of wulfgar, hrothgar's messenger and retainer.
Her queenly courtesy is well shown in the poem.
Weohstan , or wihstan .
A wægmunding, and father of wiglaf.
A prominent promontory, on which beowulf's mound was built.
Son of wihstan, and related to beowulf.
He remains faithful to beowulf in the fatal struggle with the fire drake.
Would rather die than leave his lord in his dire emergency.
Father of wulf and eofor.
Ongentheow disables him, and is thereupon slain by eofor.
Lord of the wendels, and retainer of hrothgar.
A people to whom belonged heatholaf, who was slain by ecgtheow.
Younger brother of æschere, the hero whose death grieved hrothgar so deeply.
List of words and phrases not in general use.
Mound, rounded hill, funeral mound.
A round ornament on a necklace.
Worthy for a long time past.
Handle, hilt used by synecdoche for 'sword.
Ocean, curved surface of the sea.
Sea in compounds, 'mere ways,' 'mere currents,' etc.
Often used of god also in compounds, as 'wielder of glory,' 'wielder of worship.
The life and death of scyld.
The lord, in requital, wielder of glory, with world honor blessed him.
Suggests 'lændagas' for 'lange' and the beloved land prince enjoyed his transitory days .
The reading of the h. so.
His promise he brake not, rings he lavished, treasure at banquet.
Some authorities would translate ' demon ' instead of ' stranger .
Twas a fearful affliction to the friend of the scyldings soul crushing sorrow.
The translation is based on 'weras,' adopted by h. so.
For 'unhælo' r. suggests 'unfælo' the uncanny creature, greedy and cruel, etc .
For 'syððan,' b. suggests 'sárcwidum' hence in mournful words it became well known, etc .
Various other words beginning with 's' have been conjectured.
Glossary is very inconsistent in referring to this passage.
Sibbe' , which h. so.
Regards as an instr., b. takes as accus., obj.
Hrothgar was much grieved that grendel had not appeared before his throne to receive presents.
He was not permitted to devastate the hall, on account of the creator i.e.
God wished to make his visit fatal to him.
Beowulf goes to hrothgar's assistance.
Fast the days fleeted the float was a water, the craft by the cliff.
From hám' is much disputed.
One rendering is beowulf, being away from home, heard of hrothgar's troubles, etc .
Another, that adopted by s. and endorsed in the h. so.
Notes, is b. heard from his neighborhood , i.e.
In his home, etc .
A third is b., being at home, heard this as occurring away from home .
Eoletes' is marked with a by h. so.
Our rendering simply follows his conjecture.
Other conjectures as to 'eolet' are voyage , toil , labor , hasty journey .
The lacuna of the ms at this point has been supplied by various conjectures.
The reading adopted by h. so.
Has been rendered in the above translation.
For some time on the wall i have been coast guard, etc .
Seld guma' is variously rendered housecarle home stayer common man .
Dr. h. wood suggests a man at arms in another's house .
V. the geats reach heorot.
This band, i hear, beareth no malice to the prince of the scyldings.
Pass ye then onward with weapons and armor.
To the sea i will get me 'gainst hostile warriors as warden to stand.
Edwendan' b. takes to be the subs.
Edwenden' and 'bisigu' he takes as gen.
Sing., limiting 'edwenden' if reparation for sorrows is ever to come .
This is supported by t.b.
They read 'ferh wearde' and 'gúðmódgum men' .
Beowulf introduces himself at the palace.
The highway glistened with many hued pebble, a by path led the liegemen together.
To hrothgar the king i am servant and liegeman.
And others translate 'unhár' by 'bald' old and bald .
Hrothgar answered, helm of the scyldings i remember this man as the merest of striplings.
Here let your battle boards, wood spears and war shafts, await your conferring.
I am higelac's kinsman and vassal forsooth many a wonder i dared as a stripling.
Goes weird as she must go!
Some render 'gif sceattas' by 'tribute.
If this be accepted, change ' of the geatmen' to ' to the geatmen.
This would be better but for changing 'cyn' to 'hám.
This makes no change except to read ' fífel ' for ' fífe .
And b. take it as an adv.
Modifying etan will eat the geats fearlessly .
Considers this reading absurd, and proposes 'anforhte' timid.
Understanding 'unforhte' as an adj.
That it gives a parallel to 'geátena leóde' but to take it as an adv.
Translates thou wilt not need my head to hide .
Simrock imagines a kind of dead watch.
S. proposes a colon after 'nimeð' .
This would make no essential change in the translation.
Owing to the vagueness of 'feorme' , this passage is variously translated.
S glossary has been quite closely followed.
This agrees substantially with b.
Líc' is also a crux here, as it may mean living body or dead body.
He was better than i am!
God can easily hinder the scather from deeds so direful.
B. and s. reject the reading given in h.
So., and suggested by grtvg.
Reaches the above translation by erasing the comma after 'meoto' and reading 'sige hrèðsecgum.
There are other and bolder emendations and suggestions.
All the renderings are unsatisfactory, the one given in our translation involving a zeugma.
The pledge that he made thee the son of beanstan hath soothly accomplished.
It has been plausibly suggested that 'síð' means 'arrival.
If so, translate the bracket .
So ill meaning enemies often did cause me sorrow the sorest.
But me did it fortune to fell with my weapon nine of the nickers.
The liegemen all rose then.
Thou shalt want no enjoyments, survive thou safely adventure so glorious!
The repetition of 'hwæðere' is regarded by some scholars as a defect.
B. suggests 'swá þær' for the first so there it befell me, etc.
Suggests a period after 'determined.
A night very lurid the trav'ler at twilight came tramping and striding.
Understood 'gódra' as meaning 'advantages in battle.
Usually rendered 'then,' he translates 'when,' and connects its clause with the foregoing sentence.
These changes he makes to reduce the number of 'cóm's' as principal verbs.
Time, place from which, place to which, are all given.
Neath the cloudy cliffs came from the moor then grendel going, god's anger bare he.
Then came to the building the warrior marching, bereft of his joyance.
His fingers crackled the giant was outward, the earl stepped farther.
Angry they both were, archwarders raging.
For 'réðe rén weardas' , t.b.
Translate they were both angry, raging and mighty .
At last for the danemen, when the slaughter was over, their wish was accomplished.
Mid venomous haters to the hands of foemen he was foully delivered, offdriven early.
Then the light of the morning was hurried and hastened.
S. emends, suggesting 'déop' for 'déog,' and removing semicolon after 'wéol.
Might 'guma gilp hladen' mean 'a man laden with boasts of the deeds of others'?
S 'hé þæs áron þáh' as given by h.
The all ruler quite thee with good from his hand as he hitherto did thee!
Read 'staþole,' and translate stood on the floor .
For 'snaring from grendel,' 'sorrows at grendel's hands' has been suggested.
This gives a parallel to 'láðes.
Grynna' may well be gen. pl.
Of 'gyrn,' by a scribal slip.
Construes 'wéa' as nom abs.
Hrothgar lavishes gifts upon his deliverer.
One difficult point is to find a subject for 'gesacan.
The genitives in this case are partitive.
If 'he' be subj., the genitives are dependent on 'gearwe' .
The scop's song of finn and hnæf.
K. suggests 'wið hengeste wiht gefeohtan.
Neither emendation would make any essential change in the translation.
For 'gúð rinc,' 'gúð réc,' battle smoke , has been suggested.
The lay was concluded, the gleeman's recital.
Shouts again rose then, bench glee resounded, bearers then offered wine from wonder vats.
So ought one to do.
Report hath informed me thou'lt have for a bairn the battle brave hero.
Hengest then still the slaughter stained winter remained there with finn very peaceably .
The two passages become thus correlatives, the second a sequel of the first.
The 'h' may have been carried over from the three alliterating 'h's.
The choicest of mead halls with cheering resounded.
Be, while thou livest, a wealth blessèd atheling.
Be kind to my son, thou living in joyance!
Here each of the nobles is true unto other, gentle in spirit, loyal to leader.
Then she went to the settle.
C. suggests a semicolon after 'city,' with 'he' as supplied subject of 'fled' and 'chose.
S. suggests ' wine joyous heroes ,' ' warriors elated with wine .
Oft' frequently means 'constantly,' 'continually,' not always 'often.
Why 'an wíg gearwe' should be written 'ánwíg gearwe' , i cannot see.
Gearwe' occurs quite frequently with 'on' cf.
Moreover, what has the idea of single combat to do with b.
They sank then to slumber.
There was hubbub in heorot.
Quick from a room was beowulf brought, brave and triumphant.
Read then return of sorrows to the nobles, etc .
This emendation supplies the syntactical gap after 'edhwyrft.
Some authorities follow grein's lexicon in treating 'heard ecg' as an adj.
Renders it as a subst.
The sense of the translation would be the same.
B. suggests 'under hróf genam' .
In such circumstances,' which interchanges in good usage with 'under such circumstances.
Hrothgar's account of the monsters.
Hrothgar rejoined, helm of the scyldings ask not of joyance!
Grief is renewed to the folk of the danemen.
Now is help to be gotten from thee and thee only!
For 'gefrægnod' , k. and t.b.
Suggest 'gefægnod,' rendering ' rejoicing in her fill .
This gives a parallel to 'æse wlanc' .
Sé þe' is an instance of masc.
For 'hrímge' in the h. so.
And others read 'hrínde' , and translate which rustling forests overhang .
Beowulf answered, ecgtheow's son grieve not, o wise one!
To battle thane noble lifeless lying, 'tis at last most fitting.
Then for hrothgar a war horse was decked with a bridle, curly maned courser.
The current was seething with blood and with gore .
Beowulf's fight with grendel's mother.
The half line would then read, ' the battle sword splendid .
Suggest 'feaxe' for 'eaxle' and render seized by the hair .
Sw. and s. change h.
The ninth hour came then.
Þæs monige gewearð' and 'hafað þæs geworden' .
The impersonal verb 'geweorðan,' with an accus.
Of the person, and a þæt clause is used several times with the meaning 'agree.
By emending 'is' instead of 'wæs' , the tenses will be brought into perfect harmony.
This same idiom occurs, and was noticed in b.
Here 'súð dene' is accus.
Of person, and 'gúðe' is gen. of thing agreed on.
Bróden mæl' is regarded by most scholars as meaning a damaskeened sword.
Translate the damaskeened sword burned up .
Cyning balde' is the much disputed reading of k. and th.
To render this, nobly bold , excellently bold , have been suggested.
Cynebealde,' says t.b., endorsing gr.
Beowulf spake, offspring of ecgtheow lo!
Learn then from this, lay hold of virtue!
Though laden with winters, i have sung thee these measures.
Or rather, perhaps, ' the inlaid, or damaskeened weapon .
Then again as before were the famous for prowess, hall inhabiters, handsomely banqueted, feasted anew.
K. says ' proudly giveth .
B. suggests 'gyld' for 'gylp,' and renders and gives no beaten rings for reward .
As the passage stands in h.
So., unferth presents beowulf with the sword hrunting, and b. thanks him for the gift.
If, however, the suggestions of grdtvg.
This people i know tow'rd foeman and friend firmly established, after ancient etiquette everywise blameless.
S. and b. emend so as to negative the verb 'meet.
Why should hrothgar weep if he expects to meet beowulf again?
Along by the mast then a sea garment fluttered, a rope fastened sail.
The wave goer hastened driven by breezes, stood on the shore.
For 'scawan' , 'scaðan' has been proposed.
On' bears the alliteration cf.
This has some advantages over the h. so.
This changes the syntax of 'léofra manna.
For 'wunað' several eminent critics suggest 'wunade' .
This makes the passage much clearer.
Why should such a woman be described as an 'excellent' queen?
C. suggests 'frécnu' dangerous, bold.
For 'an dæges' various readings have been offered.
If 'án dæges' be adopted, translate dared look upon her the whole day .
Higelac 'gan then pleasantly plying his companion with questions in the high towering palace.
To god i am thankful to be suffered to see thee safe from thy journey.
Meodu scencum' some would render ' with mead pourers .
Translate then the daughter of hæreth went through the building accompanied by mead pourers .
For 'fenne,' supplied by grdtvg., b. suggests 'fácne' .
Accepting this, translate who longest lives of the hated race, steeped in treachery .
The 'nó' of our text is an emendation, and is rejected by many scholars.
Seldan' is by some taken as an adv.
And by others as a noun .
Búgeð,' most scholars regard as the intrans.
Hwær,' very recently, has been attacked, 'wære' being suggested.
Beowulf narrates his adventures to higelac.
The horrible woman avengèd her offspring, and with mighty mainstrength murdered a hero.
I found then the famous flood current's cruel, horrible depth warder.
For 'lifigende' , a mere conjecture, 'wígende' has been suggested.
The line would then read escapeth by fighting, knows the land thoroughly .
S conjecture, b. proposes 'færunga.
The phrase 'þíne lýfe' was long rendered ' with thy permission .
Rendering , though liable to objection, is perhaps the best offered.
Perhaps, 'eft' with verbs of saying may have the force of lat.
Prefix 're,' and the h. so.
Reading mean, 'that i should its origin rehearse to thee.
The hoard and the dragon.
For 'long gestréona,' b. suggests 'láengestréona,' and renders, of fleeting treasures .
S. accepts h.'s 'long gestréona,' but renders, the treasure long in accumulating .
The same scholar suggests later 'hord wynne dæl' a deal of treasure joy .
Some read 'fec word' , and render banning words uttered .
The translation in the text is more authentic.
The reading of h. so.
Is well defended in the notes to that volume.
S emendation would give substantially the same translation.
Hám' , the suggestion of b. is accepted by t.b.
For 'láðan cynnes' , t.b.
Suggests 'láðan cynne,' apposition to 'mægum.
From syntactical and other considerations, this is a most excellent emendation.
As it is mournful for an old man, etc.
... so the defence of the weders bore heart sorrow, etc.
The punctuation of the fourth edition would be better a comma after 'galgan' .
Now shall weapon's edge make war for the treasure, and hand and firm sword.
The ward of the barrow i'll not flee from a foot length, the foeman uncanny.
I am eager in spirit, with the wingèd war hero to away with all boasting.
Twas early thereafter the excellent warriors met with each other.
The translation turns upon 'wiðgrípan,' a word not understood.
The translation of this passage is based on 'unsláw' , accepted by h.
So., in lieu of the long standing 'ungléaw.
The former is taken as an adj.
Limiting 'sweord' the latter as an adj.
The latter gives a more rhetorical anglo saxon sentence.
Beowulf is deserted by friends and by sword.
The passage ' brand ... burnie ,' is much disputed.
Úrum' , being a peculiar form, has been much discussed.
Byrdu scrúd' is also a crux.
B. suggests 'býwdu scrúd' splendid vestments .
Nor is 'bám' accepted by all, 'béon' being suggested.
For 'þonne' he reads 'þone,' rel.
He soon then discovered that bitterest bale woe in his bosom was raging, poison within.
This emendation relieves the passage of a plethora of conjunctive þæt 's.
For 'gefyldan' , s. proposes 'gefylde.
The reading ' life drove out strength ' is very unsatisfactory and very peculiar.
Wiglaf plunders the dragon's den.
Sight of the dragon not any was offered, but edge offcarried him.
The passage beginning here is very much disputed.
Too few of protectors came round the king at the critical moment.
Death is more pleasant to every earlman than infamous life is!
Hige méðum' is glossed by h. as dat.
S. proposes 'hige méðe,' nom.
W., mood weary, holds head watch o'er friend and foe .
B. suggests taking the word as dat.
Of an abstract noun in 'u.
The translation would be substantially the same as s.'s.
Then was offered pursuance to the braves of the swedemen, the banner to higelac.
The passage would then stand ' the old one went then,' etc.
S. suggests 'sæcc higeláces,' and renders higelac's pursuit.
He thinks that the idea of vanished time ought to be expressed.
The last is rejected on many grounds.
The reference, however, would be to the thief, not to the dragon.
S.'s is the best yet offered, if 'wundor' means 'mystery.
This would require 'ravage' to be changed to 'tread.
Folc ágende' b. takes as dat.
C. proposes to take 'weaxan' l. 'vescor,' and translate devour .
This gives a parallel to 'fretan' above.
Several discrepancies and other oversights have been noticed in the h. so.
The rest will, i hope, be noticed in their fourth edition.
Þær gelýfan sceal dryhtnes dóme .
Under 'benc þelu' h. says nom.
While under 'eal' he says nom.
Harrison and sharp avoid the discrepancy.
Under 'féond scaða' h. says 'a gleaming sea monster' under 'fáh' he says 'hostile.
Onfeng hraðe inwit þancum .
Under 'níð wundor' h. calls this word itself nom.
Under 'séon' he translates it as accus.
Sing., understanding 'man' as subject of 'séon.
H. and s. make the correction.
H., under the second word, calls it instr.
While under 'forgifan' he makes it the dat.
H. and s. make the change.
Brád and brún ecg .
Under this word h. makes it modify 'ástód.
If this be right, the punctuation of the fifth edition is wrong.
See h. and s., appendix.
Under 'sél' and 'gesécan' h. calls these two words accus.
But this is clearly an error, as both are nom.
H. and s. correct under 'sél.
Under 'wið' and 'gesittan' h. says 'wið near, by' under 'self' he says 'opposite.
Þéow is omitted from the glossary.
Under 'duguð' h. translates this phrase, 'in tüchtigkeit' under 'for,' by 'vor der edlen kriegerschaar.
Under 'wealdan' h. translates þær by 'wo' under 'mótan,' by 'da.
H. and s. suggest 'if' in both passages.
Under 'wund' h. says 'dative,' and under 'wæl bléate' he says 'accus.
It is without doubt accus., parallel with 'benne.
Under 'strengo' h. says 'strengum' mit macht under 'gebæded' he translates 'von den sehnen.
H. and s. correct this discrepancy by rejecting the second reading.
The fourth edition had 'bronda betost.
There only remain a hundred and twenty thousand children of poor parents annually born.
The question therefore is, how this number shall be reared and provided for?
And as to the young labourers, they are now in almost as hopeful a condition.
I have too long digressed, and therefore shall return to my subject.
Many other advantages might be enumerated.
But this, and many others, i omit, being studious of brevity.
By herman melville contents etymology.
Enter ahab to him, stubb.
The whiteness of the whale.
Of the monstrous pictures of whales.
Of the less erroneous pictures of whales, and the true pictures of whaling scenes.
The whale as a dish.
Stubb and flask kill a right whale and then have a talk over him.
The sperm whale’s head contrasted view.
The right whale’s head contrasted view.
The pequod meets the virgin.
The honor and glory of whaling.
Fast fish and loose fish.
The pequod meets the rose bud.
A squeeze of the hand.
Stowing down and clearing up.
A bower in the arsacides.
Measurement of the whale’s skeleton.
Does the whale’s magnitude diminish?
Ahab and starbuck in the cabin.
The pequod meets the bachelor.
The deck towards the end of the first night watch.
The pequod meets the rachel.
The pequod meets the delight.
The resulting etext was compared with a public domain hard copy version of the text.
The pale usher threadbare in coat, heart, body, and brain i see him now.
He loved to dust his old grammars it somehow mildly reminded him of his mortality.
This animal is named from roundness or rolling for in dan.
Hvalt is arched or vaulted.
It is more immediately from the dut.
Wallen a.s. walw ian , to roll, to wallow.
Pekee nuee nuee, fegee .
Pehee nuee nuee, erromangoan .
So fare thee well, poor devil of a sub sub, whose commentator i am.
Would that i could clear out hampton court and the tuileries for ye!
Here ye strike but splintered hearts together there, ye shall strike unsplinterable glasses!
And god created great whales.
Now the lord had prepared a great fish to swallow up jonah.
There go the ships there is that leviathan whom thou hast made to play therein.
Among the former, one was of a most monstrous size....
He said that he was one of six who had killed sixty in two days.
Apology for raimond sebond .
Let us fly, let us fly!
This whale’s liver was two cartloads.
The great leviathan that maketh the seas to seethe like boiling pan.
Lord bacon’s version of the psalms .
Touching that monstrous bulk of the whale or ork we have received nothing certain.
History of life and death .
The sovereignest thing on earth is parmacetti for an inward bruise.
Of sperma ceti and the sperma ceti whale.
Waller’s battle of the summer islands .
Opening sentence of hobbes’s leviathan .
Fuller’s profane and holy state .
Thomas edge’s ten voyages to spitzbergen, in purchas .
Sir t. herbert’s voyages into asia and africa.
We set sail from the elbe, wind n.e.
In the ship called the jonas in the whale....
Some say the whale can’t open his mouth, but that is a fable....
The jaws of it stand for a gate in the garden of pitferren.
Sibbald’s fife and kinross .
Richard strafford’s letter from the bermudas.
Whales in the sea god’s voice obey.
To fifty chosen sylphs of special note, we trust the important charge, the petticoat.
Rape of the lock .
The whale is doubtless the largest animal in creation.
The larger whales, they seldom venture to attack.
And pray, sir, what in the world is equal to it?
Edmund burke’s reference in parliament to the nantucket whale fishery .
Spain a great whale stranded on the shores of europe.
Cowper, on the queen’s visit to london .
John hunter’s account of the dissection of a whale .
The whale is a mammiferous animal without hind feet.
Colnett’s voyage for the purpose of extending the spermaceti whale fishery .
Montgomery’s world before the flood .
To the finny people’s king.
Charles lamb’s triumph of the whale .
Obed macy’s history of nantucket .
Hawthorne’s twice told tales .
He’s a raal oil butt, that fellow!
Eckermann’s conversations with goethe .
Mr. chace, what is the matter?
I answered, we have been stove by a whale.
By owen chace of nantucket, first mate of said vessel.
There she blows, was sung out from the mast head.
Three points off the lee bow, sir.
Do you see that whale now?
A shoal of sperm whales!
There there thar she blows bowes bo o os!
Two miles and a half.
J. ross browne’s etchings of a whaling cruize .
Narrative of the globe mutiny , by lay and hussey survivors.
Missionary journal of tyerman and bennett .
The whale fell directly over him, and probably killed him in a moment.
Life of samuel comstock , by his brother, william comstock.
Another version of the whale ship globe narrative .
Tales of a whale voyager to the arctic ocean .
Newspaper account of the taking and retaking of the whale ship hobomack .
Cruise in a whale boat .
Suddenly a mighty mass emerged from the water, and shot up perpendicularly into the air.
Miriam coffin or the whale fisherman .
A chapter on whaling in ribs and trucks .
Darwin’s voyage of a naturalist .
It is a way i have of driving off the spleen and regulating the circulation.
This is my substitute for pistol and ball.
There is nothing surprising in this.
Right and left, the streets take you waterward.
Look at the crowds of water gazers there.
Circumambulate the city of a dreamy sabbath afternoon.
Go from corlears hook to coenties slip, and from thence, by whitehall, northward.
Are the green fields gone?
Here come more crowds, pacing straight for the water, and seemingly bound for a dive.
They must get just as nigh the water as they possibly can without falling in.
And there they stand miles of them leagues.
Yet here they all unite.
Say you are in the country in some high land of lakes.
There is magic in it.
Yes, as every one knows, meditation and water are wedded for ever.
But here is an artist.
What is the chief element he employs?
Water there is not a drop of water there!
Why did the old persians hold the sea holy?
Why did the greeks give it a separate deity, and own brother of jove?
Surely all this is not without meaning.
But that same image, we ourselves see in all rivers and oceans.
I abandon the glory and distinction of such offices to those who like them.
And at first, this sort of thing is unpleasant enough.
But even this wears off in time.
On the contrary, passengers themselves must pay.
And there is all the difference in the world between paying and being paid.
But being paid , what will compare with it?
How cheerfully we consign ourselves to perdition!
He thinks he breathes it first but not so.
It came in as a sort of brief interlude and solo between more extensive performances.
Whaling voyage by one ishmael.
Chief among these motives was the overwhelming idea of the great whale himself.
Such a portentous and mysterious monster roused all my curiosity.
I love to sail forbidden seas, and land on barbarous coasts.
Quitting the good city of old manhatto, i duly arrived in new bedford.
It was a saturday night in december.
I knew no one in the place.
But go on, ishmael, said i at last don’t you hear?
Get away from before the door your patched boots are stopping the way.
But the crossed harpoons, and the sword fish?
This, then must needs be the sign of the trap.
It seemed the great black parliament sitting in tophet.
Rather ominous in that particular connexion, thought i.
Yes, these eyes are windows, and this body of mine is the house.
But it’s too late to make any improvements now.
Says old dives, in his red silken wrapper pooh, pooh!
What a fine frosty night how orion glitters what northern lights!
Can he warm his blue hands by holding them up to the grand northern lights?
Would not lazarus rather be in sumatra than here?
Go down to the fiery pit itself, in order to keep out this frost?
A boggy, soggy, squitchy picture truly, enough to drive a nervous man distracted.
Ever and anon a bright, but, alas, deceptive idea would dart you through.
It’s the black sea in a midnight gale.
It’s the unnatural combat of the four primal elements.
It’s a hyperborean winter scene.
It’s the breaking up of the icebound stream of time.
That once found out, and all the rest were plain.
But stop does it not bear a faint resemblance to a gigantic fish?
Even the great leviathan himself?
Mixed with these were rusty old whaling lances and harpoons all broken and deformed.
Abominable are the tumblers into which he pours his poison.
Parallel meridians rudely pecked into the glass, surround these footpads’ goblets.
All right take a seat.
Nothing but two dismal tallow candles, each in a winding sheet.
My boy, said the landlord, you’ll have the nightmare to a dead sartainty.
Landlord, i whispered, that aint the harpooneer is it?
The devil he does, says i.
He’ll be here afore long, was the answer.
Presently a rioting noise was heard without.
Starting up, the landlord cried, that’s the grampus’s crew.
Hurrah, boys now we’ll have the latest news from the feegees.
They had just landed from their boat, and this was the first house they entered.
I have seldom seen such brawn in a man.
And darted out of the house in pursuit of him.
No man prefers to sleep two in a bed.
In fact, you would a good deal rather not sleep with your own brother.
I began to twitch all over.
I’ve changed my mind about that harpooneer.
I shan’t sleep with him.
I’ll try the bench here.
It seemed no bad idea but upon second thoughts i dismissed it.
Thinks i, i’ll wait awhile he must be dropping in before long.
It was now hard upon twelve o’clock.
What sort of a bamboozingly story is this you are telling me?
Getting into a towering rage.
With heads to be sure ain’t there too many heads in the world?
It’s broke a’ready, said he.
Broke, said i broke , do you mean?
Sartain, and that’s the very reason he can’t sell it, i guess.
Landlord, said i, going up to him as cool as mt.
Hecla in a snow storm landlord, stop whittling.
You and i must understand one another, and that too without delay.
Depend upon it, landlord, that harpooneer is a dangerous man.
He pays reg’lar, was the rejoinder.
Arter that, sal said it wouldn’t do.
I turned round from eyeing the bed, but he had disappeared.
Folding back the counterpane, i stooped over the bed.
Though none of the most elegant, it yet stood the scrutiny tolerably well.
But what is this on the chest?
I then took off my coat, and thought a little more in my shirt sleeves.
Lord save me, thinks i, that must be the harpooneer, the infernal head peddler.
But i lay perfectly still, and resolved not to say a word till spoken to.
This accomplished, however, he turned round when, good heavens!
They were stains of some sort or other.
And what is it, thought i, after all!
It’s only his outside a man can be honest in any sort of skin.
His bald purplish head now looked for all the world like a mildewed skull.
Meanwhile, he continued the business of undressing, and at last showed his chest and arms.
I quaked to think of it.
A peddler of heads too perhaps the heads of his own brothers.
He might take a fancy to mine heavens!
But the interval i spent in deliberating what to say, was a fatal one.
But his guttural responses satisfied me at once that he but ill comprehended my meaning.
Landlord, for god’s sake, peter coffin!
Tell ee me who ee be, or dam me, i kill e!
But turn flukes again and go to sleep.
Queequeg, look here you sabbee me, i sabbee you this man sleepe you you sabbee?
Me sabbee plenty grunted queequeg, puffing away at his pipe and sitting up in bed.
I stood looking at him a moment.
For all his tattooings he was on the whole a clean, comely looking cannibal.
Better sleep with a sober cannibal than a drunken christian.
But i don’t fancy having a man smoking in bed with me.
Good night, landlord, said i, you may go.
I turned in, and never slept better in my life.
You had almost thought i had been his wife.
Let me try to explain them.
The small of my back ached to think of it.
Nay, to this very hour, i often puzzle myself with it.
I now strove to rouse him queequeg!
But his only answer was a snore.
In the name of goodness, queequeg, wake!
He was just enough civilized to show off his outlandishness in the strangest possible manners.
His education was not yet completed.
He complied, and then proceeded to wash himself.
Thinks i, queequeg, this is using rogers’s best cutlery with a vengeance.
You could pretty plainly tell how long each one had been ashore.
But who could show a cheek like queequeg?
Now cried the landlord, flinging open a door, and in we went to breakfast.
Still, for the most part, that sort of thing is to be had anywhere.
And not only that, but they looked embarrassed.
A curious sight these bashful bears, these timid warrior whalemen!
To be sure i cannot say much for his breeding.
Even in broadway and chestnut streets, mediterranean mariners will sometimes jostle the affrighted ladies.
But new bedford beats all water street and wapping.
It makes a stranger stare.
Many are as green as the green mountains whence they came.
In some things you would think them but a few hours old.
That chap strutting round the corner.
Here comes another with a sou’ wester and a bombazine cloak.
Still new bedford is a queer place.
The town itself is perhaps the dearest place to live in, in all new england.
How planted upon this once scraggy scoria of a country?
Can herr alexander perform a feat like that?
And the women of new bedford, they bloom like their own red roses.
I am sure that i did not.
Returning from my first morning stroll, i again sallied out upon this special errand.
The sky had changed from clear, sunny cold, to driving sleet and mist.
Entering, i found a small scattered congregation of sailors, and sailors’ wives and widows.
A muffled silence reigned, only broken at times by the shrieks of the storm.
This tablet is erected to his memory by his sister.
This marble is here placed by their surviving shipmates.
This tablet is erected to his memory by his widow.
What bitter blanks in those black bordered marbles which cover no ashes!
What despair in those immovable inscriptions!
As well might those tablets stand in the cave of elephanta as here.
All these things are not without their meanings.
Yes, ishmael, the same fate may be thine.
But somehow i grew merry again.
Methinks we have hugely mistaken this matter of life and death.
Methinks that what they call my shadow here on earth is my true substance.
Methinks my body is but the lees of my better being.
In fact take my body who will, take it i say, it is not me.
I pondered some time without fully comprehending the reason for this.
The sun is breaking through the clouds are rolling off serenest azure is at hand.
What could be more full of meaning?
Side away to larboard larboard gangway to starboard!
Yet what depths of the soul does jonah’s deep sealine sound!
What a pregnant lesson to us is this prophet!
What a noble thing is that canticle in the fish’s belly!
How billow like and boisterously grand!
But what is this lesson that the book of jonah teaches?
He skulks about the wharves of joppa, and seeks a ship that’s bound for tarshish.
There lurks, perhaps, a hitherto unheeded meaning here.
By all accounts tarshish could have been no other city than the modern cadiz.
That’s the opinion of learned men.
And where is cadiz, shipmates?
See ye not then, shipmates, that jonah sought to flee world wide from god?
How plainly he’s a fugitive!
Strong intuitions of the man assure the mariners he can be no innocent.
He will not confess himself suspected but that itself is strong suspicion.
How that harmless question mangles jonah!
For the instant he almost turns to flee again.
No sooner, sir?’ soon enough for any honest man that goes a passenger.’ ha!
But he swiftly calls away the captain from that scent.
I’ll sail with ye,’ he says, the passage money how much is that?
And taken with the context, this is full of meaning.
He charges him thrice the usual sum and it’s assented to.
Yet when jonah fairly takes out his purse, prudent suspicions still molest the captain.
He rings every coin to find a counterfeit.
Not a forger, any way, he mutters and jonah is put down for his passage.
The air is close, and jonah gasps.
But that contradiction in the lamp more and more appals him.
The floor, the ceiling, and the side, are all awry.
That ship, my friends, was the first of recorded smugglers!
But the sea rebels he will not bear the wicked burden.
A dreadful storm comes on, the ship is like to break.
Terrors upon terrors run shouting through his soul.
In all his cringing attitudes, the god fugitive is now too plainly known.
The lot is jonah’s that discovered, then how furiously they mob him with their questions.
But mark now, my shipmates, the behavior of poor jonah.
Aye, well mightest thou fear the lord god then!
Then jonah prayed unto the lord out of the fish’s belly.
But observe his prayer, and learn a weighty lesson.
For sinful as he is, jonah does not weep and wail for direct deliverance.
He feels that his dreadful punishment is just.
Sin not but if you do, take heed to repent of it like jonah.
But god is everywhere tarshish he never reached.
And what was that, shipmates?
To preach the truth to the face of falsehood!
Woe to him whom this world charms from gospel duty!
Woe to him who seeks to please rather than to appal!
Woe to him whose good name is more to him than goodness!
Woe to him who, in this world, courts not dishonor!
Woe to him who would not be true, even though to be false were salvation!
Is not the main truck higher than the kelson is low?
Chiefly known to me by thy rod mortal or immortal, here i die.
I have striven to be thine, more than to be this world’s, or mine own.
With much interest i sat watching him.
You cannot hide the soul.
He looked like a man who had never cringed and never had had a creditor.
Queequeg was george washington cannibalistically developed.
At first they are overawing their calm self collectedness of simplicity seems a socratic wisdom.
I felt a melting in me.
No more my splintered heart and maddened hand were turned against the wolfish world.
This soothing savage had redeemed it.
I’ll try a pagan friend, thought i, since christian kindness has proved but hollow courtesy.
I told him yes whereat i thought he looked pleased, perhaps a little complimented.
After supper, and another social chat and smoke, we went to our room together.
How then could i unite with this wild idolator in worshipping his piece of wood?
To do the will of god that is worship.
And what is the will of god?
Now, queequeg is my fellow man.
And what do i wish that this queequeg would do to me?
Why, unite with me in my particular presbyterian form of worship.
Consequently, i must then unite with him in his ergo, i must turn idolator.
But we did not go to sleep without some little chat.
Thus, then, in our hearts’ honeymoon, lay i and queequeg a cosy, loving pair.
I no more felt unduly concerned for the landlord’s policy of insurance.
Queequeg was a native of rokovoko, an island far away to the west and south.
It is not down in any map true places never are.
But queequeg vowed a vow.
But this fine young savage this sea prince of wales, never saw the captain’s cabin.
They put him down among the sailors, and made a whaleman of him.
Thought he, it’s a wicked world in all meridians i’ll die a pagan.
Hence the queer ways about him, though now some time from home.
I asked him what might be his immediate purpose, touching his future movements.
It was in sag harbor.
Why, said i, queequeg, you might have known better than that, one would think.
Upon this, he told me another story.
Now, said queequeg, what you tink now?
At last, passage paid, and luggage safe, we stood on board the schooner.
Hoisting sail, it glided down the acushnet river.
Such is the endlessness, yea, the intolerableness of all earthly effort.
How i snuffed that tartar air!
How i spurned that turnpike earth!
At the same foam fountain, queequeg seemed to drink and reel with me.
His dusky nostrils swelled apart he showed his filed and pointed teeth.
Queequeg caught one of these young saplings mimicking him behind his back.
I thought the bumpkin’s hour of doom was come.
Yelled the bumpkin, running towards that officer capting, capting, here’s the devil.
Don’t you know you might have killed that chap?
Said queequeg, as he mildly turned to me.
Kill e, cried queequeg, twisting his tattooed face into an unearthly expression of disdain, ah!
I looked at the grand and glorious fellow, but saw no one to be saved.
The greenhorn had gone down.
The boat soon picked them up.
The poor bumpkin was restored.
All hands voted queequeg a noble trump the captain begged his pardon.
Was there ever such unconsciousness?
We cannibals must help these christians.
Take out your map and look at it.
Look at it a mere hillock, and elbow of sand all beach, without a background.
But these extravaganzas only show that nantucket is no illinois.
They resolved to follow in the same direction.
And a pair of prodigious black pots too!
Are these last throwing out oblique hints touching tophet?
Get along with ye, said she to the man, or i’ll be combing ye!
Come on, queequeg, said i, all right.
What’s that about cods, ma’am?
Said i, with much politeness.
A cold clam is that what you mean, mrs. hussey?
But when that smoking chowder came in, the mystery was delightfully explained.
What’s that stultifying saying about chowder headed people?
But look, queequeg, ain’t that a live eel in your bowl?
The area before the house was paved with clam shells.
Said i every true whaleman sleeps with his harpoon but why not?
Because it’s dangerous, says she.
But the chowder clam or cod to morrow for breakfast, men?
Both, says i and let’s have a couple of smoked herring by way of variety.
In bed we concocted our plans for the morrow.
Her venerable bows looked bearded.
She was a thing of trophies.
A cannibal of a craft, tricking herself forth in the chased bones of her enemies.
A noble craft, but somehow a most melancholy!
All noble things are touched with that.
It seemed only a temporary erection used in port.
Such eye wrinkles are very effectual in a scowl.
Is this the captain of the pequod?
Said i, advancing to the door of the tent.
Supposing it be the captain of the pequod, what dost thou want of him?
I was thinking of shipping.
I see thou art no nantucketer ever been in a stove boat?
No, sir, i never have.
Dost know nothing at all about whaling, i dare say eh?
Nothing, sir but i have no doubt i shall soon learn.
Talk not that lingo to me.
I suppose now ye feel considerable proud of having served in those marchant ships.
Man, what makes thee want to go a whaling, eh?
It looks a little suspicious, don’t it, eh?
Hast not been a pirate, hast thou?
Didst not rob thy last captain, didst thou?
Dost not think of murdering the officers when thou gettest to sea?
I protested my innocence of these things.
But what takes thee a whaling?
I want to know that before i think of shipping ye.
Well, sir, i want to see what whaling is.
I want to see the world.
Want to see what whaling is, eh?
Have ye clapped eye on captain ahab?
Who is captain ahab, sir?
Aye, aye, i thought so.
Captain ahab is the captain of this ship.
I thought i was speaking to the captain himself.
Thou art speaking to captain peleg that’s who ye are speaking to, young man.
We are part owners and agents.
What do you mean, sir?
Was the other one lost by a whale?
Sure , ye’ve been to sea before now sure of that?
Mind what i said about the marchant service don’t aggravate me i won’t have it.
But let us understand each other.
Was not that what ye said?
Said peleg when i came back what did ye see?
Well, what does thou think then of seeing the world?
Do ye wish to go round cape horn to see any more of it, eh?
Can’t ye see the world where you stand?
Seeing me so determined, he expressed his willingness to ship me.
And so saying, he led the way below deck into the cabin.
Seated on the transom was what seemed to me a most uncommon and surprising figure.
They are fighting quakers they are quakers with a vengeance.
For all men tragically great are made so through a certain morbidness.
Be sure of this, o young ambition, all mortal greatness is but disease.
Like captain peleg, captain bildad was a well to do, retired whaleman.
Indolence and idleness perished before him.
His own person was the exact embodiment of his utilitarian character.
Bildad, cried captain peleg, at it again, bildad, eh?
How far ye got, bildad?
He says he’s our man, bildad, said peleg, he wants to ship.
Said bildad, in a hollow tone, and turning round to me.
I dost , said i unconsciously, he was so intense a quaker.
What do ye think of him, bildad?
But i said nothing, only looking round me sharply.
The seven hundred and seventy seventh!
He must have more than that.
The three hundredth lay, i say.
The seven hundred and seventy seventh lay, captain peleg.
Roared peleg, starting up and clattering about the cabin.
Ye insult me, man past all natural bearing, ye insult me.
It’s an all fired outrage to tell any human creature that he’s bound to hell.
He seemed quite used to impenitent peleg and his ways.
He whistled at last the squall’s gone off to leeward, i think.
Bildad, thou used to be good at sharpening a lance, mend that pen, will ye.
My jack knife here needs the grindstone.
That’s he thank ye, bildad.
Now then, my young man, ishmael’s thy name, didn’t ye say?
Well then, down ye go here, ishmael, for the three hundredth lay.
To be sure, said peleg.
Fetch him along, and we’ll look at him.
What lay does he want?
Groaned bildad, glancing up from the book in which he had again been burying himself.
Never thee mind about that, bildad, said peleg.
Has he ever whaled it any?
Killed more whales than i can count, captain peleg.
Well, bring him along then.
Turning back i accosted captain peleg, inquiring where captain ahab was to be found.
And what dost thou want of captain ahab?
It’s all right enough thou art shipped.
Yes, but i should like to see him.
But i don’t think thou wilt be able to at present.
In fact, he ain’t sick but no, he isn’t well either.
He’s a queer man, captain ahab so some think but a good one.
Oh, thou’lt like him well enough no fear, no fear.
Aye, the keenest and the surest that out of all our isle!
And a very vile one.
When that wicked king was slain, the dogs, did they not lick his blood?
Look ye, lad never say that on board the pequod.
Captain ahab did not name himself.
And, perhaps, other fools like her may tell thee the same.
I wish to warn thee.
Besides, my boy, he has a wife not three voyages wedded a sweet, resigned girl.
No, no, my lad stricken, blasted, if he be, ahab has his humanities!
I tried to open it, but it was fastened inside.
Queequeg, said i softly through the key hole all silent.
But all remained still as before.
I began to grow alarmed.
I tried to burst open the door but it stubbornly resisted.
She cried, i thought something must be the matter.
And with these cries, she ran towards the kitchen, i following.
Cried i, which way to it?
Run for god’s sake, and fetch something to pry open the door the axe!
He’s had a stroke depend upon it!
What’s the matter with you, young man?
For god’s sake, run for the doctor, some one, while i pry it open!
And with that she seized my arm.
What’s the matter with you?
What’s the matter with you, shipmate?
I haven’t seen it since i put it there.
He’s killed himself, she cried.
It’s unfort’nate stiggs done over again there goes another counterpane god pity his poor mother!
It will be the ruin of my house.
Has the poor lad a sister?
The lord be merciful to his ghost!
You, young man, avast there!
I don’t allow it i won’t have my premises spoiled.
Go for the locksmith, there’s one about a mile from here.
And with that, she turned it in the lock but, alas!
Queequeg’s supplemental bolt remained unwithdrawn within.
Queequeg, said i, going up to him, queequeg, what’s the matter with you?
He hain’t been a sittin’ so all day, has he?
I went down to supper.
For heaven’s sake, queequeg, get up and shake yourself get up and have some supper.
You’ll starve you’ll kill yourself, queequeg.
But not a word did he reply.
For some time, do all i would, i could not get into the faintest doze.
And just so i now did with queequeg.
Queequeg, said i, get into bed now, and lie and listen to me.
This is the reason why most dyspeptic religionists cherish such melancholy notions about their hereafters.
He said no only upon one memorable occasion.
What do you mean by that, captain peleg?
Said i, now jumping on the bulwarks, and leaving my comrade standing on the wharf.
I mean, he replied, he must show his papers.
He must show that he’s converted.
Why, said i, he’s a member of the first congregational church.
First congregational church, cried bildad, what!
That worships in deacon deuteronomy coleman’s meeting house?
How long hath he been a member?
He then said, turning to me not very long, i rather guess, young man.
Do tell, now, cried bildad, is this philistine a regular member of deacon deuteronomy’s meeting?
I never saw him going there, and i pass it every lord’s day.
He is a deacon himself, queequeg is.
Young man, said bildad sternly, thou art skylarking with me explain thyself, thou young hittite.
What church dost thee mean?
Finding myself thus hard pushed, i replied.
Splice, thou mean’st splice hands, cried peleg, drawing nearer.
Deacon deuteronomy why father mapple himself couldn’t beat it, and he’s reckoned something.
Come aboard, come aboard never mind about the papers.
I say, tell quohog there what’s that you call him?
Tell quohog to step along.
By the great anchor, what a harpoon he’s got there!
Looks like good stuff that and he handles it about right.
Did you ever strike a fish?
Well, spose him one whale eye, well, den!
Quick, i say, you bildad, and get the ship’s papers.
We must have hedgehog there, i mean quohog, in one of our boats.
I say, quohog, blast ye!
Dost thou sign thy name or make thy mark?
Steer clear of the fiery pit!
Avast there, avast there, bildad, avast now spoiling our harpooneer, cried peleg.
Thou beliest thine own heart, peleg.
When every moment we thought the ship would sink!
Death and the judgment then?
Think of death and the judgment then?
No time to think about death then.
Shipmates, have ye shipped in that ship?
Have ye shipped in her?
Yes, said i, we have just signed the articles.
Anything down there about your souls?
Oh, perhaps you hav’n’t got any, he said quickly.
A soul’s a sort of a fifth wheel to a wagon.
What are you jabbering about, shipmate?
Ye said true ye hav’n’t seen old thunder yet, have ye?
Said i, again riveted with the insane earnestness of his manner.
The captain of our ship, the pequod?
Aye, among some of us old sailor chaps, he goes by that name.
Ye hav’n’t seen him yet, have ye?
All right again before long!
Laughed the stranger, with a solemnly derisive sort of laugh.
What do you know about him?
What did they tell you about him?
That’s true, that’s true yes, both true enough.
But you must jump when he gives an order.
Step and growl growl and go that’s the word with captain ahab.
Heard nothing about that, eh?
Nothing about the silver calabash he spat into?
And nothing about his losing his leg last voyage, according to the prophecy.
Didn’t ye hear a word about them matters and something more, eh?
No, i don’t think ye did how could ye?
Not all nantucket, i guess.
All about it, eh sure you do?
Names down on the papers?
Morning to ye, shipmates, morning the ineffable heavens bless ye i’m sorry i stopped ye.
Morning to ye, shipmates, morning!
When ye get there, tell ’em i’ve concluded not to make one of ’em.
Ah, my dear fellow, you can’t fool us that way you can’t fool us.
Morning to ye, shipmates, morning.
Morning it is, said i.
Come along, queequeg, let’s leave this crazy man.
But stop, tell me your name, will you?
But elijah passed on, without seeming to notice us.
A day or two passed, and there was great activity aboard the pequod.
Nor was bildad himself nor captain peleg at all backward.
And much this way it was with me.
I said nothing, and tried to think nothing.
So next morning, queequeg and i took a very early start.
Hands off, will you, said i. lookee here, said queequeg, shaking himself, go ’way!
Yes, we are, said i, but what business is that of yours?
Do you know, mr. elijah, that i consider you a little impertinent?
Elijah, said i, you will oblige my friend and me by withdrawing.
He’s cracked, queequeg, said i, come on.
Cried stationary elijah, hailing us when we had removed a few paces.
Never mind him, said i, queequeg, come on.
Very dim, very dim, said elijah.
He rejoined, again moving off.
Shan’t see ye again very soon, i guess unless it’s before the grand jury.
Going forward to the forecastle, we found the slide of the scuttle open.
The profoundest slumber slept upon him.
Those sailors we saw, queequeg, where can they have gone to?
Said i, looking dubiously at the sleeper.
Queequeg, don’t sit there, said i. oh!
Perry dood seat, said queequeg, my country way won’t hurt him face.
Said i, call that his face?
Look, he’ll twitch you off soon.
I wonder he don’t wake.
I sat at the feet.
We kept the pipe passing over the sleeper, from one to the other.
Perry easy, kill e oh!
The strong vapor now completely filling the contracted hole, it began to tell upon him.
He breathed at last, who be ye smokers?
Shipped men, answered i, when does she sail?
Aye, aye, ye are going in her, be ye?
The captain came aboard last night.
Starbuck’s astir, said the rigger.
And so saying he went on deck, and we followed.
It was now clear sunrise.
Meanwhile captain ahab remained invisibly enshrined within his cabin.
Well, call all hands, then.
Muster ’em aft here blast ’em!
He seemed to do most of the talking and commanding, and not bildad.
Mr. starbuck, drive ’em aft.
Was the next command, and the crew sprang for the handspikes.
That was my first kick.
Is that the way they heave in the marchant service?
Spring, thou sheep head spring, and break thy backbone!
Why don’t ye spring, i say, all of ye spring!
Spring, thou chap with the red whiskers spring there, scotch cap spring, thou green pants.
Spring, i say, all of ye, and spring your eyes out!
Thinks i, captain peleg must have been drinking something to day.
At last the anchor was up, the sails were set, and off we glided.
So to the jews old canaan stood, while jordan rolled between.
Never did those sweet words sound more sweetly to me than then.
They were full of hope and fruition.
At last we gained such an offing, that the two pilots were needed no longer.
The stout sail boat that had accompanied us began ranging alongside.
Back the main yard there!
Stand by to come close alongside, now!
Come, bildad, boy say your last.
Be careful in the hunt, ye mates.
Don’t forget your prayers, either.
Mr. starbuck, mind that cooper don’t waste the spare staves.
The sail needles are in the green locker!
If ye touch at the islands, mr. flask, beware of fornication.
Don’t keep that cheese too long down in the hold, mr. starbuck it’ll spoil.
And with that, peleg hurried him over the side, and both dropt into the boat.
The land seemed scorching to his feet.
For worm like, then, oh!
Who would craven crawl to land!
Is all this agony so vain?
Take heart, take heart, o bulkington!
Up from the spray of thy ocean perishing straight up, leaps thy apotheosis!
To his visiting card, such a procedure would be deemed pre eminently presuming and ridiculous.
Butchers we are, that is true.
Why did the dutch in de witt’s time have admirals of their whaling fleets?
How comes all this, if there be not something puissant in whaling?
But this is not the half look again.
It would be a hopeless, endless task to catalogue all these things.
The whale ship is the true mother of that now mighty colony.
The whale has no famous author, and whaling no famous chronicler, you will say.
The whale no famous author, and whaling no famous chronicler?
Who wrote the first account of our leviathan?
And who composed the first narrative of a whaling voyage?
And who pronounced our glowing eulogy in parliament?
No good blood in their veins?
They have something better than royal blood there.
Good again but then all confess that somehow whaling is not respectable.
By old english statutory law, the whale is declared a royal fish.
The whale himself has never figured in any grand imposing way.
The whale never figured in any grand imposing way?
See subsequent chapters for something more on this head.
The dignity of our calling the very heavens attest.
Cetus is a constellation in the south!
Drive down your hat in presence of the czar, and take it off to queequeg!
I know a man that, in his lifetime, has taken three hundred and fifty whales.
In behalf of the dignity of whaling, i would fain advance naught but substantiated facts.
How they use the salt, precisely who knows?
As a general rule, he can’t amount to much in his totality.
Think of that, ye loyal britons!
We whalemen supply your kings and queens with coronation stuff!
Transported to the indies, his live blood would not spoil like bottled ale.
It was merely the condensation of the man.
He was by no means ill looking quite the contrary.
Outward portents and inward presentiments were his.
What doom was his own father’s?
Where, in the bottomless deeps, could he find the torn limbs of his brother?
The centre and circumference of all democracy!
His omnipresence, our divine equality!
Bear me out in it, thou great democratic god!
Stubb was the second mate.
Long usage had, for this stubb, converted the jaws of death into an easy chair.
What he thought of death itself, there is no telling.
The third mate was flask, a native of tisbury, in martha’s vineyard.
Little flask was one of the wrought ones made to clinch tight and last long.
Now these three mates starbuck, stubb, and flask, were momentous men.
They it was who by universal prescription commanded three of the pequod’s boats as headsmen.
First of all was queequeg, whom starbuck, the chief mate, had selected for his squire.
But queequeg is already known.
In the fishery, they usually go by the generic name of gay headers.
Tashtego was stubb the second mate’s squire.
Upon the passage homewards, they drop them there again.
How it is, there is no telling, but islanders seem to make the best whalemen.
Yet now, federated along one keel, what a set these isolatoes were!
Black little pip he never did oh, no!
For several days after leaving nantucket, nothing above hatches was seen of captain ahab.
Reality outran apprehension captain ahab stood upon his quarter deck.
He has a quiver of ’em.
I was struck with the singular posture he maintained.
Ere long, from his first visit in the air, he withdrew into his cabin.
For sleeping man, ’twas hard to choose between such winsome days and such seducing nights.
And all these subtle agencies, more and more they wrought on ahab’s texture.
Stubb, thou didst not know ahab then.
Am i a cannon ball, stubb, said ahab, that thou wouldst wad me that fashion?
But go thy ways i had forgot.
Down here on my knees and pray for him?
How he flashed at me!
His eyes like powder pans!
Who’s made appointments with him in the hold?
But there’s no telling, it’s the old game here goes for a snooze.
Damn me, but all things are queer, come to think of ’em.
But that’s against my principles.
Didn’t he call me a dog?
He might as well have kicked me, and done with it.
It flashed like a bleached bone.
What the devil’s the matter with me?
I don’t stand right on my legs.
Coming afoul of that old man has a sort of turned me wrong side out.
By the lord, i must have been dreaming, though how?
How now, he soliloquized at last, withdrawing the tube, this smoking no longer soothes.
Hard must it go with me if thy charm be gone!
What business have i with this pipe?
I’ll smoke no more he tossed the still lighted pipe into the sea.
With slouched hat, ahab lurchingly paced the planks.
Next morning stubb accosted flask.
Such a queer dream, king post, i never had.
Ahab seemed a pyramid, and i, like a blazing fool, kept kicking at it.
Why,’ thinks i, what’s the row?
The living member that makes the living insult, my little man.
What are you ’bout?’ says he.
Man, but i was frightened.
But, somehow, next moment i was over the fright.
What am i about?’ says i at last.
And what business is that of yours, i should like to know, mr. humpback?
Why thunder alive, man, his stern was stuck full of marlinspikes, with the points out.
Well then,’ says he, wise stubb, what have you to complain of?
Didn’t he kick with right good will?
It wasn’t a common pitch pine leg he kicked with, was it?
No, you were kicked by a great man, and with a beautiful ivory leg, stubb.
It’s an honor i consider it an honor.
I snored rolled over and there i was in my hammock!
Now, what do you think of that dream, flask?
But it’s made a wise man of me, flask.
D’ye see ahab standing there, sideways looking over the stern?
Look sharp, all of ye!
If ye see a white one, split your lungs for him!
What do you think of that now, flask?
Ain’t there a small drop of something queer about that, eh?
A white whale did ye mark that, man?
Look ye there’s something special in the wind.
Stand by for it, flask.
Ahab has that that’s bloody on his mind.
But, mum he comes this way.
Yet is it no easy task.
The classification of the constituents of a chaos, nothing less is here essayed.
Listen to what the best and latest authorities have laid down.
Unfitness to pursue our research in the unfathomable waters.
Impenetrable veil covering our knowledge of the cetacea.
A field strewn with thorns.
All these incomplete indications but serve to torture us naturalists.
He is not even by any means the largest of the whales.
But the time has at last come for a new proclamation.
This is charing cross hear ye!
Good people all, the greenland whale is deposed, the great sperm whale now reigneth!
As yet, however, the sperm whale, scientific or poetic, lives not complete in any literature.
Far above all other hunted whales, his is an unwritten life.
My object here is simply to project the draught of a systematization of cetology.
I am the architect, not the builder.
What am i that i should essay to hook the nose of this leviathan!
The awful tauntings in job might well appal me.
Will he make a covenant with thee?
Behold the hope of him is vain!
There are some preliminaries to settle.
Charley profanely hinted they were humbug.
Above, linnæus has given you those items.
To be short, then, a whale is a spouting fish with a horizontal tail .
However contracted, that definition is the result of expanded meditation.
Now, then, come the grand divisions of the entire whale host.
Among these i here include the following chapters i.
The fin back whale iv.
The hump backed whale v. the razor back whale vi.
The sulphur bottom whale .
Book i. , chapter i. .
All his peculiarities will, in many other places, be enlarged upon.
It is chiefly with his name that i now have to do.
Philologically considered, it is absurd.
Book i. , chapter ii.
There is a deal of obscurity concerning the identity of the species thus multitudinously baptised.
What then is the whale, which i include in the second species of my folios?
Book i. , chapter iii.
On that ahaz dial the shadow often goes back.
The fin back is not gregarious.
He seems a whale hater, as some men are man haters.
And it is just the same with the other parts above mentioned.
On this rock every one of the whale naturalists has split.
This whale is often seen on the northern american coast.
He has been frequently captured there, and towed into harbor.
His oil is not very valuable.
Book i. , chapter v. .
Of this whale little is known but his name.
I have seen him at a distance off cape horn.
Of a retiring nature, he eludes both hunters and philosophers.
I know little more of him, nor does anybody else.
Book i. , chapter vi.
He is never chased he would run away with rope walks of line.
Prodigies are told of him.
I can say nothing more that is true of ye, nor can the oldest nantucketer.
Thus ends book i. , and now begins book ii.
Why this book of whales is not denominated the quarto is very plain.
So, call him the hyena whale, if you please.
This whale averages some sixteen or eighteen feet in length.
He is found in almost all latitudes.
That is, nostril whale .
What precise purpose this ivory horn or lance answers, it would be hard to say.
But you cannot prove either of these surmises to be correct.
Originally it was in itself accounted an object of great curiosity.
He is mostly found in the circumpolar seas.
He is very savage a sort of feegee fish.
The killer is never hunted.
I never heard what sort of oil he has.
For we are all killers, on land and on sea bonapartes and sharks included.
Still less is known of the thrasher than of the killer.
Both are outlaws, even in the lawless seas.
And begins book iii.
These include the smaller whales.
A spouting fish, with a horizontal tail.
This is the common porpoise found almost all over the globe.
Their appearance is generally hailed with delight by the mariner.
Full of fine spirits, they invariably come from the breezy billows to windward.
They are the lads that always live before the wind.
They are accounted a lucky omen.
A well fed, plump huzza porpoise will yield you one good gallon of good oil.
But the fine and delicate fluid extracted from his jaws is exceedingly valuable.
It is in request among jewellers and watchmakers.
Sailors put it on their hones.
Porpoise meat is good eating, you know.
It may never have occurred to you that a porpoise spouts.
Indeed, his spout is so small that it is not very readily discernible.
He is only found, i think, in the pacific.
He is somewhat larger than the huzza porpoise, but much of the same general make.
Provoke him, and he will buckle to a shark.
I have lowered for him many times, but never yet saw him captured.
But his mealy mouth spoils all.
A most mean and mealy aspect!
His oil is much like that of the common porpoise.
Above, you have all the leviathans of note.
You cannot but plainly see that i have kept my word.
God keep me from ever completing anything.
This whole book is but a draught nay, but the draught of a draught.
Oh, time, strength, cash, and patience!
Who has but once dined his friends, has tasted what it is to be cæsar.
It is a witchery of social czarship which there is no withstanding.
In his own proper turn, each officer waited to be served.
His were the shinbones of the saline beef his would have been the drumsticks.
Least of all, did flask presume to help himself to butter.
For hereby flask’s dinner was badly jammed in point of time.
Peace and satisfaction, thought flask, have for ever departed from my stomach.
And then the three harpooneers were bidden to the feast, they being its residuary legatees.
They made a sort of temporary servants’ hall of the high and mighty cabin.
But for all this, the great negro was wonderfully abstemious, not to say dainty.
Not by beef or by bread, are giants made or nourished.
Hard fares the white waiter who waits upon cannibals.
Not a napkin should he carry on his arm, but a buckler.
Though nominally included in the census of christendom, he was still an alien to it.
The tranced ship indolently rolls the drowsy trade winds blow everything resolves you into languor.
And let me in this place movingly admonish you, ye ship owners of nantucket!
Nor are these monitions at all unneeded.
Ten thousand blubber hunters sweep over thee in vain.
They have left their opera glasses at home.
Whales are scarce as hen’s teeth whenever thou art up here.
Over descartian vortices you hover.
Heed it well, ye pantheists!
Whispered stubb the chick that’s in him pecks the shell.
It drew near the close of day.
Send everybody aft, repeated ahab.
But this did not last long.
Vehemently pausing, he cried what do ye do when ye see a whale, men?
Was the impulsive rejoinder from a score of clubbed voices.
And what do ye next, men?
Lower away, and after him!
And what tune is it ye pull to, men?
A dead whale or a stove boat!
D’ye see this spanish ounce of gold?
Mr. starbuck, hand me yon top maul.
Do ye know the white whale then, tash?
Does he fan tail a little curious, sir, before he goes down?
Said the gay header deliberately.
And he have one, two, three oh!
Men, it is moby dick ye have seen moby dick moby dick!
Then tossing both arms, with measureless imprecations he shouted out aye, aye!
And this is what ye have shipped for, men!
What say ye, men, will ye splice hands on it, now?
I think ye do look brave.
God bless ye, he seemed to half sob and half shout.
Go draw the great measure of grog.
But what’s this long face about, mr. starbuck wilt thou not chase the white whale?
Art not game for moby dick?
How many barrels will thy vengeance yield thee even if thou gettest it, captain ahab?
It will not fetch thee much in our nantucket market.
But come closer, starbuck thou requirest a little lower layer.
He smites his chest, whispered stubb, what’s that for?
Methinks it rings most vast, but hollow.
Vengeance on a dumb brute!
Cried starbuck, that simply smote thee from blindest instinct!
To be enraged with a dumb thing, captain ahab, seems blasphemous.
Hark ye yet again the little lower layer.
All visible objects, man, are but as pasteboard masks.
If man will strike, strike through the mask!
How can the prisoner reach outside except by thrusting through the wall?
To me, the white whale is that wall, shoved near to me.
Sometimes i think there’s naught beyond.
Talk not to me of blasphemy, man i’d strike the sun if it insulted me.
But not my master, man, is even that fair play.
More intolerable than fiends’ glarings is a doltish stare!
So, so thou reddenest and palest my heat has melted thee to anger glow.
But look ye, starbuck, what is said in heat, that thing unsays itself.
There are men from whom warm words are small indignity.
I meant not to incense thee.
See yonder turkish cheeks of spotted tawn living, breathing pictures painted by the sun.
The crew, man, the crew!
Are they not one and all with ahab, in this matter of the whale?
He snorts to think of it.
Stand up amid the general hurricane, thy one tost sapling cannot, starbuck!
’tis but to help strike a fin no wondrous feat for starbuck.
Constrainings seize thee i see!
Thy silence, then, that voices thee.
Something shot from my dilated nostrils, he has inhaled it in his lungs.
Starbuck now is mine cannot oppose me now, without rebellion.
Ah, ye admonitions and warnings!
Why stay ye not when ye come?
But rather are ye predictions than warnings, ye shadows!
Yet not so much predictions from without, as verifications of the foregoing things within.
Only to fall into the hidden snare of the indian.
He cried, handing the heavy charged flagon to the nearest seaman.
The crew alone now drink.
Short draughts long swallows, men ’tis hot as satan’s hoof.
So, so it goes round excellently.
It spiralizes in ye forks out at the serpent snapping eye.
That way it went, this way it comes.
Hand it me here’s a hollow!
Men, ye seem the years so brimming life is gulped and gone.
O men, you will yet see that ha!
Bad pennies come not sooner.
Cross your lances full before me.
Let me touch the axis.
The three mates quailed before his strong, sustained, and mystic aspect.
Stubb and flask looked sideways from him the honest eye of starbuck fell downright.
Cried ahab but, maybe, ’tis well.
Perchance, too, it would have dropped ye dead.
Perchance ye need it not.
What, when the great pope washes the feet of beggars, using his tiara for ewer?
Your own condescension, that shall bend ye to it.
I do not order ye ye will it.
Cut your seizings and draw the poles, ye harpooneers!
Stab me not with that keen steel!
Cant them cant them over!
Know ye not the goblet end?
So, so now, ye cup bearers, advance.
Take them hold them while i fill!
Now, three to three, ye stand.
Bestow them, ye who are now made parties to this indissoluble league.
But the deed is done!
Yon ratifying sun now waits to sit upon it.
Drink and swear, ye men that man the deathful whaleboat’s bow death to moby dick!
God hunt us all, if we do not hunt moby dick to his death!
Starbuck paled, and turned, and shivered.
The cabin by the stern windows ahab sitting alone, and gazing out .
I leave a white and turbid wake pale waters, paler cheeks, where’er i sail.
The envious billows sidelong swell to whelm my track let them but first i pass.
Yonder, by ever brimming goblet’s rim, the warm waves blush like wine.
The gold brow plumbs the blue.
The diver sun slow dived from noon goes down my soul mounts up!
She wearies with her endless hill.
Is, then, the crown too heavy that i wear?
This iron crown of lombardy.
’tis iron that i know not gold.
Dry heat upon my brow?
Time was, when as the sunrise nobly spurred me, so the sunset soothed.
Damned in the midst of paradise!
’twas not so hard a task.
That to fire others, the match itself must needs be wasting!
What i’ve dared, i’ve willed and what i’ve willed, i’ll do!
They think me mad starbuck does but i’m demoniac, i am madness maddened!
That wild madness that’s only calm to comprehend itself!
The prophecy was that i should be dismembered and aye!
I now prophesy that i will dismember my dismemberer.
Now, then, be the prophet and the fulfiller one.
That’s more than ye, ye great gods, ever were.
Come forth from behind your cotton bags!
I have no long gun to reach ye.
Come, ahab’s compliments to ye come and see if ye can swerve me.
Ye cannot swerve me, else ye swerve yourselves!
Over unsounded gorges, through the rifled hearts of mountains, under torrents’ beds, unerringly i rush!
Naught’s an obstacle, naught’s an angle to the iron way!
By the mainmast starbuck leaning against it .
My soul is more than matched she’s overmanned and by a madman!
Insufferable sting, that sanity should ground arms on such a field!
But he drilled deep down, and blasted all my reason out of me!
Time and tide flow wide.
His heaven insulting purpose, god may wedge aside.
I would up heart, were it not like lead.
Whelped somewhere by the sharkish sea.
The white whale is their demigorgon.
Mark the unfaltering silence aft!
The long howl thrills me through!
Ye revellers, and set the watch!
’tis now that i do feel the latent horror in thee!
That horror’s out of me!
Stand by me, hold me, bind me, o ye blessed influences!
I’ve been thinking over it ever since, and that ha, ha’s the final consequence.
Be sure the old mogul has fixed him, too.
Well, stubb, wise stubb that’s my title well, stubb, what of it, stubb?
Such a waggish leering as lurks in all your horribles!
What’s my juicy little pear at home doing now?
A brave stave that who calls?
Aye, aye, sir he’s my superior, he has his too, if i’m not mistaken.
Aye, aye, sir, just through with this job coming.
Farewell and adieu to you, spanish ladies!
Farewell and adieu to you, ladies of spain!
Oh, boys, don’t be sentimental it’s bad for the digestion!
Take a tonic, follow me!
So, be cheery, my lads!
May your hearts never fail!
While the bold harpooner is striking the whale!
Mate’s voice from the quarter deck.
Strike the bell eight, thou pip!
And let me call the watch.
I’ve the sort of mouth for that the hogshead mouth.
So, so, star bo l e e n s, a h o y!
Grand snoozing to night, maty fat night for that.
We sing they sleep aye, lie down there, like ground tier butts.
There, take this copper pump, and hail ’em through it.
Tell ’em to avast dreaming of their lasses.
Tell ’em it’s the resurrection they must kiss their last, and come to judgment.
That’s the way that’s it thy throat ain’t spoiled with eating amsterdam butter.
Let’s have a jig or two before we ride to anchor in blanket bay.
There comes the other watch.
Don’t know where it is.
Beat thy belly, then, and wag thy ears.
Jig it, men, i say merry’s the word hurrah!
Damn me, won’t you dance?
Form, now, indian file, and gallop into the double shuffle?
I don’t like your floor, maty it’s too springy to my taste.
I’m used to ice floors.
I’m sorry to throw cold water on the subject but excuse me.
Me too where’s your girls?
Aye girls and a green!
Then i’ll hop with ye yea, turn grasshopper!
Well, well, ye sulkies, there’s plenty more of us.
Hoe corn when you may, say i.
All legs go to harvest soon.
Here comes the music now for it!
Here you are, pip and there’s the windlass bitts up you mount!
Rig it, dig it, stig it, quig it, bell boy!
Make fire flies break the jinglers!
There goes another, dropped off i pound it so.
Rattle thy teeth, then, and pound away make a pagoda of thyself.
Hold up thy hoop, pip, till i jump through it!
That’s a white man he calls that fun humph!
I wonder whether those jolly lads bethink them of what they are dancing over.
To think of the green navies and the green skulled crews!
Dance on, lads, you’re young i was once.
This is worse than pulling after whales in a calm give us a whiff, tash.
Boys, it’ll be douse sail soon.
The sky born, high tide ganges turned to wind!
Thou showest thy black brow, seeva!
It’s the waves the snow’s caps turn to jig it now.
They’ll shake their tassels soon.
There’s naught so sweet on earth heaven may not match it!
Tell me not of it!
Hark ye, lad fleet interlacings of the limbs lithe swayings coyings flutterings!
All graze unceasing touch and go!
Not taste, observe ye, else come satiety.
Hail, holy nakedness of our dancing girls!
Low veiled, high palmed tahiti!
I still rest me on thy mat, but the soft soil has slid!
I saw thee woven in the wood, my mat!
Green the first day i brought ye thence now worn and wilted quite.
Not thou nor i can bear the change!
How then, if so be transplanted to yon sky?
Up, spine, and meet it!
How the sea rolls swashing ’gainst the side!
Stand by for reefing, hearties!
The winds are just crossing swords, pell mell they’ll go lunging presently.
So long as thou crackest, thou holdest!
The mate there holds ye to it stiffly.
He has his orders, mind ye that.
But that old man’s a grand old cove!
We are the lads to hunt him up his whale!
How the three pines shake!
Who’s afraid of black’s afraid of me!
I’m quarried out of it!
He wants to bully, ah!
That spaniard’s mad or drunk.
What’s that i saw lightning?
No daggoo showing his teeth.
A row a’low, and a row aloft gods and men both brawlers!
The virgin be blessed, a row!
In that ring cain struck abel.
Why then, god, mad’st thou the ring?
Stand by to reef topsails!
There goes the jib stay!
Duck lower, pip, here comes the royal yard!
It’s worse than being in the whirled woods, the last day of the year!
Who’d go climbing after chestnuts now?
But there they go, all cursing, and here i don’t.
Fine prospects to ’em they’re on the road to heaven.
But those chaps there are worse yet they are your white squalls, they.
Here have i heard all their chat just now, and the white whale shirr!
A wild, mystical, sympathetical feeling was in me ahab’s quenchless feud seemed mine.
But there were still other and more vital practical influences at work.
That to attempt it, would be inevitably to be torn into a quick eternity.
On this head, there are some remarkable documents that may be consulted.
More than all, his treacherous retreats struck more of dismay than perhaps aught else.
Already several fatalities had attended his chase.
In a strait jacket, he swung to the mad rockings of the gales.
Human madness is oftentimes a cunning and most feline thing.
That before living agent, now became the living instrument.
This is much yet ahab’s larger, darker, deeper part remains unhinted.
But vain to popularize profundities, and all truth is profound.
Wind ye down there, ye prouder, sadder souls!
Question that proud, sad king!
He was intent on an audacious, immitigable, and supernatural revenge.
Who does not feel the irresistible arm drag?
What skiff in tow of a seventy four can stand still?
It was the whiteness of the whale that above all things appalled me.
Not coleridge first threw that spell but god’s great, unflattering laureate, nature.
I remember the first albatross i ever saw.
It was during a prolonged gale, in waters hard upon the antarctic seas.
Wondrous flutterings and throbbings shook it.
Though bodily unharmed, it uttered cries, as some king’s ghost in supernatural distress.
Through its inexpressible, strange eyes, methought i peeped to secrets which took hold of god.
Long i gazed at that prodigy of plumage.
I cannot tell, can only hint, the things that darted through me then.
But at last i awoke and turning, asked a sailor what bird was this.
But some time after, i learned that goney was some seaman’s name for albatross.
But how had the mystic thing been caught?
It is that whiteness which invests him, a thing expressed by the name he bears.
Why should this be so?
To analyse it, would seem impossible.
And of all these things the albino whale was the symbol.
Wonder ye then at the fiery hunt?
Did you hear that noise, cabaco?
In this manner, they passed the buckets to fill the scuttle butt.
Take the bucket, will ye, archy?
Pass along that return bucket.
There again there it is!
It sounds like two or three sleepers turning over, now!
Have done, shipmate, will ye?
Say what ye will, shipmate i’ve sharp ears.
Grin away we’ll see what turns up.
But not so in the reality, perhaps.
So, too, with some other feeding grounds, where he had at times revealed himself.
Therefore, he must wait for the next ensuing season.
His broad fins are bored, and scalloped out like a lost sheep’s ear!
He sleeps with clenched hands and wakes with his own bloody nails in his palms.
This man and this whale again came together, and the one vanquished the other.
I say three years, but i am pretty sure it was more than that.
Was it not so, o timor tom!
Was it not so, o new zealand jack!
Was it not so, o morquan!
Was it not so, o don miguel!
Thou chilian whale, marked like an old tortoise with mystic hieroglyphics upon the back!
But this is not all.
No because the mails are very irregular between here and new guinea.
For god’s sake, be economical with your lamps and candles!
Not a surviving plank of her has been seen since.
After the severest exposure, part of the crew reached the land in their boats.
At this day captain pollard is a resident of nantucket.
His aspect was most horrible, and such as indicated resentment and fury.
Very good but there is more coming.
Some weeks after, the commodore set sail in this impregnable craft for valparaiso.
I am not superstitious, but i consider the commodore’s interview with that whale as providential.
Was not saul of tarsus converted from unbelief by a similar fright?
I tell you, the sperm whale will stand no nonsense.
I have the honor of being a nephew of his.
I have particularly questioned him concerning this passage in langsdorff.
A fact thus set down in substantial history cannot easily be gainsaid.
Nor is there any reason it should be.
Of what precise species this sea monster was, is not mentioned.
And i will tell you why.
It might be that a long interval would elapse ere the white whale was seen.
Nor was ahab unmindful of another thing.
In times of strong emotion mankind disdain all base considerations but such times are evanescent.
The permanent constitutional condition of the manufactured man, thought ahab, is sordidness.
I will not strip these men, thought ahab, of all hopes of cash aye, cash.
Nor was there wanting still another precautionary motive more related to ahab personally.
This vigilance was not long without reward.
I was the attendant or page of queequeg, while busy at the mat.
High aloft in the cross trees was that mad gay header, tashtego.
On the lee beam, about two miles off!
The sperm whale blows as a clock ticks, with the same undeviating and reliable uniformity.
And thereby whalemen distinguish this fish from other tribes of his genus.
Was now the cry from tashtego and the whales disappeared.
Dough boy hurried below, glanced at the watch, and reported the exact minute to ahab.
Ready, was the half hissed reply.
Lower away then d’ye hear?
Lower away there, i say.
Spread yourselves, cried ahab give way, all four boats.
Thou, flask, pull out more to leeward!
Aye, aye, sir, cheerily cried little king post, sweeping round his great steering oar.
There she blows right ahead, boys!
Never heed yonder yellow boys, archy.
Oh, i don’t mind ’em, sir, said archy i knew it all before now.
Didn’t i hear ’em in the hold?
And didn’t i tell cabaco here of it?
They are stowaways, mr. flask.
Why don’t you break your backbones, my boys?
What is it you stare at?
Those chaps in yonder boat?
Pull, then, do pull never mind the brimstone devils are good fellows enough.
Hurrah for the gold cup of sperm oil, my heroes!
Three cheers, men all hearts alive!
Easy, easy don’t be in a hurry don’t be in a hurry.
Why don’t you snap your oars, you rascals?
So, so, so, then softly, softly!
Give way there, give way!
The devil fetch ye, ye ragamuffin rapscallions ye are all asleep.
Stop snoring, ye sleepers, and pull.
Why in the name of gudgeons and ginger cakes don’t ye pull?
Pull, and start your eyes out!
Now ye do something that looks like it, my steel bits.
Start her start her, my silver spoons!
Not at all and therein consisted his chief peculiarity.
A word with ye, sir, if ye please!
What think ye of those yellow boys, sir!
Smuggled on board, somehow, before the ship sailed.
But never mind, mr. stubb, all for the best.
Let all your crew pull strong, come what will.
There’s hogsheads of sperm ahead, mr. stubb, and that’s what ye came for.
This at least is duty duty and profit hand in hand.
They were hidden down there.
The white whale’s at the bottom of it.
Well, well, so be it!
It ain’t the white whale to day!
Boat and crew sat motionless on the sea.
Instantly the three spread boats in the rear paused on their way.
Every man look out along his oars!
It is used for catching turns with the whale line.
Good a mast head as any, sir.
Still more strange to see him giddily perched upon the loggerhead itself, under such circumstances.
On his broad back, flaxen haired flask seemed a snow flake.
The bearer looked nobler than the rider.
Meanwhile stubb, the third mate, betrayed no such far gazing solicitudes.
He withdrew it from his hatband, where he always wore it aslant like a feather.
How different the loud little king post.
Sing out and say something, my hearties.
Roar and pull, my thunderbolts!
Lay me on lay me on!
But i shall go stark, staring mad!
Yes, give him fits that’s the very word pitch fits into ’em.
Pudding for supper, you know merry’s the word.
Pull, babes pull, sucklings pull, all.
But what the devil are you hurrying about?
Softly, softly, and steadily, my men.
Only pull, and keep pulling nothing more.
Crack all your backbones, and bite your knives in two that’s all.
Meanwhile, all the boats tore on.
It was a sight full of quick wonder and awe!
And queequeg, harpoon in hand, sprang to his feet.
There , there , give it to him!
Though completely swamped, the boat was nearly unharmed.
The rising sea forbade all attempts to bale out the boat.
The oars were useless as propellers, performing now the office of life preservers.
Suddenly queequeg started to his feet, hollowing his hand to his ear.
However, nothing dispirits, and nothing seems worth while disputing.
I’ve lowered for whales from a leaking ship in a gale off cape horn.
Can’t you twist that smaller?
The whale would give them squint for squint, mind that!
Here then, from three impartial witnesses, i had a deliberate statement of the entire case.
Queequeg, said i, come along, you shall be my lawyer, executor, and legatee.
I survived myself my death and burial were locked up in my chest.
Who would have thought it, flask!
He’s a wonderful old man!
I don’t think it so strange, after all, on that account, said flask.
If his leg were off at the hip, now, it would be a different thing.
I don’t know that, my little man i never yet saw him kneel.
But with ahab the question assumed a modified aspect.
As a general thing, the joint owners of the pequod must have plainly thought not.
Nevertheless he had taken private measures of his own touching all that matter.
But one cannot sustain an indifferent air concerning fedallah.
Fedallah first descried this jet.
The best man in the ship must take the helm.
Then, with every mast head manned, the piled up craft rolled down before the wind.
On life and death this old man walked.
Every sailor swore he saw it once, but not a second time.
This midnight spout had almost grown a forgotten thing, when, some days after, lo!
Cape of good hope, do they call ye?
Then captain and crew become practical fatalists.
His lantern swung from his tightly clenched hand.
Thought starbuck with a shudder, sleeping in this gale, still thou steadfastly eyest thy purpose.
Only her lower sails were set.
Have ye seen the white whale?
Meantime his ship was still increasing the distance between.
This is the pequod, bound round the world!
Tell them to address all future letters to the pacific ocean!
Swim away from me, do ye?
Murmured ahab, gazing over into the water.
Keep her off round the world!
Besides, they would exchange the whaling news, and have an agreeable chat.
The same way that whalers hail how many barrels?
But look at the godly, honest, unostentatious, hospitable, sociable, free and easy whaler!
It sometimes ends in uncommon elevation, indeed but only at the gallows.
But what is a gam?
Dr. johnson never attained to that erudition noah webster’s ark does not hold it.
Certainly, it needs a definition, and should be incorporated into the lexicon.
With that view, let me learnedly define it.
There is another little item about gamming which must not be forgotten here.
All professions have their own little peculiarities of detail so has the whale fishery.
Merely make a spread angle of two poles, and you cannot stand them up.
She was manned almost wholly by polynesians.
In the short gam that ensued she gave us strong news of moby dick.
She was somewhere to the northward of the line.
They supposed a sword fish had stabbed her, gentlemen.
He did not love steelkilt, and steelkilt knew it.
By the lord, it’s worth bottling!
I tell ye what, men, old rad’s investment must go for it!
He had best cut away his part of the hull and tow it home.
If old rad were here now, i’d tell him to jump overboard and scatter ’em.
They’re playing the devil with his estate, i can tell him.
But he’s a simple old soul, rad, and a beauty too.
Boys, they say the rest of his property is invested in looking glasses.
What’s that pump stopping for?’ roared radney, pretending not to have heard the sailors’ talk.
Thunder away at it!’ aye, aye, sir,’ said steelkilt, merry as a cricket.
But, gentlemen, the fool had been branded for the slaughter by the gods.
We have seen many whale ships in our harbours, but never heard of your canallers.
Well then, don, refill my cup.
Well for our northern friend, dame isabella’s inquisition wanes in lima,’ laughed don sebastian.
Pardon!’ cried another of the company.
But ashore, all this effeminacy is dashed.
I see!’ impetuously exclaimed don pedro, spilling his chicha upon his silvery ruffles.
But the story.’ i left off, gentlemen, where the lakeman shook the backstay.
Will you promise not to touch us, if we do?’ demanded their ringleader.
I make no promise to your duty!
Do you want to sink the ship, by knocking off at a time like this?
Turn to!’ and he once more raised a pistol.
Sink the ship?’ cried steelkilt.
What say ye, men?’ turning to his comrades.
A fierce cheer was their response.
Look to those handspikes, my hearties.
Down ye go.’ shall we?’ cried the ringleader to his men.
Better turn to, now?’ said the captain with a heartless jeer.
Shut us up again, will ye!’ cried steelkilt.
Oh certainly,’ said the captain, and the key clicked.
For himself, he would do this, he said, whether they joined him or not.
That was the last night he should spend in that den.
And here, gentlemen, the foul play of these miscreants must come out.
Best not,’ hissed the lakeman.
But i must,’ and the rope was once more drawn back for the stroke.
You are a coward!’ hissed the lakeman.
Still, no sign of mutiny reappeared among the rest.
In this attitude, it was well known, he sometimes dozed.
What are you making there?’ said a shipmate.
Shipmate, i haven’t enough twine, have you any?’ but there was none in the forecastle.
Then i must get some from old rad ’ and he rose to go aft.
You don’t mean to go a begging to him!
Yet complete revenge he had, and without being the avenger.
There she rolls!’ jesu, what a whale!
Moby dick!’ cried don sebastian st. dominic!
Sir sailor, but do whales have christenings?
How?’ cried all the young spaniards, crowding.
Nay, dons, dons nay, nay!
I cannot rehearse that now.
Let me get more into the air, sirs.’ the chicha!
All was now a phrensy.
He was always a furious man, it seems, in a boat.
And now his bandaged cry was, to beach him on the whale’s topmost back.
He cut it and the whale was free.
All four boats gave chase again but the whale eluded them, and finally wholly disappeared.
The captain presented a pistol.
What do you want of me?’ cried the captain.
Cross your arms, sir throw back your head.
If i do not, may lightnings strike me!’ a pretty scholar,’ laughed the lakeman.
Adios, senor!’ and leaping into the sea, he swam back to his comrades.
Are you through?’ said don sebastian, quietly.
It is so passing wonderful!
Did you get it from an unquestionable source?
I go for it but are you well advised?
Let us withdraw more out of the moonlight.
Let me remove my hat.
It is guido’s picture of perseus rescuing andromeda from the sea monster or whale.
Where did guido get the model of such a strange creature as that?
What shall be said of these?
In another plate, the prodigious blunder is made of representing the whale with perpendicular flukes.
Look at that popular work goldsmith’s animated nature.
In a word, frederick cuvier’s sperm whale is not a sperm whale, but a squash.
They are generally richard iii.
But these manifold mistakes in depicting the whale are not so very surprising after all.
This fin has four regular bone fingers, the index, middle, ring, and little finger.
But i pass that matter by.
In the previous chapter colnett and cuvier have been referred to.
Huggins’s is far better than theirs but, by great odds, beale’s is the best.
That is not his fault though.
Respectively, they represent attacks on the sperm and right whale.
The action of the whole thing is wonderfully good and true.
Who garnery the painter is, or was, i know not.
The french are the lads for painting action.
But the time of his justification has now come.
Your true whale hunter is as much a savage as an iroquois.
As with the hawaiian savage, so with the white sailor savage.
Some of them are done with much accuracy.
When the porter is sleepy, the anvil headed whale would be best.
But these knocking whales are seldom remarkable as faithful essays.
You cannot examine them closely enough to decide upon their merit.
That same ocean rolls now that same ocean destroyed the wrecked ships of last year.
No mercy, no power but its own controls it.
Push not off from that isle, thou canst never return!
Thus glistening for a moment, as slowly it subsided, and sank.
Then once more arose, and silently gleamed.
It seemed not a whale and yet is this moby dick?
The white whale, the white whale!
Soon it went down, and while, with oars suspended, we were awaiting its reappearance, lo!
In the same spot where it sank, once more it slowly rose.
But much abatement is necessary with respect to the incredible bulk he assigns it.
The whale line is only two thirds of an inch in thickness.
At first sight, you would not think it so strong as it really is.
In length, the common sperm whale line measures something over two hundred fathoms.
This arrangement of the lower end is necessary on two accounts.
All men live enveloped in whale lines.
But that pipe, poor whale, was thy last.
It was obvious, now, that the whale had at length become aware of his pursuers.
All silence of cautiousness was therefore no longer of use.
Paddles were dropped, and oars came loudly into play.
And still puffing at his pipe, stubb cheered on his crew to the assault.
Yes, a mighty change had come over the fish.
Though apparently the most massive, it is by far the most buoyant part about him.
Start her, start her, my men!
Start her, now give ’em the long and strong stroke, tashtego.
But his wild screams were answered by others quite as wild.
Howled queequeg, as if smacking his lips over a mouthful of grenadier’s steak.
And thus with oars and yells the keels cut the sea.
It was the magical line.
More turns were taken, so that the line began holding its place.
The boat now flew through the boiling water like a shark all fins.
Your hat, however, is the most convenient.
Cried stubb to the bowsman!
He now cried to the bowsman, as the waning whale relaxed in his wrath.
And the boat ranged along the fish’s flank.
But that gold watch he sought was the innermost life of the fish.
He’s dead, mr. stubb, said daggoo.
Yes both pipes smoked out!
A word concerning an incident in the last chapter.
Out of the trunk, the branches grow out of them, the twigs.
So, in productive subjects, grow the chapters.
The crotch alluded to on a previous page deserves independent mention.
It is a doubling of the chances.
But this critical act is not always unattended with the saddest and most fatal casualties.
Stubb’s whale had been killed some distance from the ship.
A little item may as well be related here.
One small, helping cause of all this liveliness in stubb, was soon made strangely manifest.
A steak, a steak, ere i sleep!
Overboard you go, and cut me one from his small!
Nor was stubb the only banqueter on whale’s flesh that night.
This particular feat of the shark seems all but miraculous.
You’ve been beating this steak too much, cook it’s too tender.
Don’t i always say that to be good, a whale steak must be tough?
What a shindy they are kicking up!
Blast me, if i can hear my own voice.
Away, cook, and deliver my message.
Fellow critters i’se ordered here to say dat you must stop dat dam noise dare.
Stop dat dam smackin’ ob de lip!
You must stop dat dam racket!
Cook, here interposed stubb, accompanying the word with a sudden slap on the shoulder, cook!
Why, damn your eyes, you mustn’t swear that way when you’re preaching.
That’s no way to convert sinners, cook!
Den preach to him yourself, sullenly turning to go.
No, cook go on, go on.
Well, den, belubed fellow critters right!
Exclaimed stubb, approvingly, coax ’em to it try that, and fleece continued.
Cook, cried stubb, collaring him, i won’t have that swearing.
Once more the sermon proceeded.
Don’t be tearin’ de blubber out your neighbour’s mout, i say.
Is not one shark dood right as toder to dat whale?
Cried stubb, that’s christianity go on.
All dention, said fleece, again stooping over upon his tongs in the desired position.
In the first place, how old are you, cook?
What dat do wid de ’teak, said the old black, testily.
How old are you, cook?
’bout ninety, dey say, he gloomily muttered.
Where were you born, cook?
’hind de hatchway, in ferry boat, goin’ ober de roanoke.
Born in a ferry boat!
But i want to know what country you were born in, cook!
Didn’t i say de roanoke country?
No, you didn’t, cook but i’ll tell you what i’m coming to, cook.
Bress my soul, if i cook noder one, he growled, angrily, turning round to depart.
Take it, i say holding the tongs towards him take it, and taste it.
Cook, said stubb, squaring himself once more do you belong to the church?
Passed one once in cape down, said the old man sullenly.
Where do you expect to go to, cook?
Go to bed berry soon, he mumbled, half turning as he spoke.
I mean when you die, cook.
In a coach and four, as they fetched elijah?
But don’t you know the higher you climb, the colder it gets?
Didn’t say dat t’all, said fleece, again in the sulks.
You said up there, didn’t you?
And now look yourself, and see where your tongs are pointing.
It’s a ticklish business, but must be done, or else it’s no go.
But none of us are in heaven yet.
Drop your tongs, cook, and hear my orders.
That’s it now you have it.
Hold it there now, and pay attention.
As for the ends of the flukes, have them soused, cook.
There, now ye may go.
But fleece had hardly got three paces off, when he was recalled.
Cook, give me cutlets for supper to morrow night in the mid watch.
Make a bow before you go.
Whale balls for breakfast don’t forget.
Whale eat him, ’stead of him eat whale.
Porpoises, indeed, are to this day considered fine eating.
The old monks of dunfermline were very fond of them.
They had a great porpoise grant from the crown.
But what further depreciates the whale as a civilized dish, is his exceeding richness.
He is the great prize ox of the sea, too fat to be delicately good.
Many a good supper have i thus made.
In the case of a small sperm whale the brains are accounted a fine dish.
The head looks a sort of reproachfully at him, with an et tu brute!
Does not that sight take a tooth out of the cannibal’s jaw?
Who is not a cannibal?
But stubb, he eats the whale by its own light, does he?
And that is adding insult to injury, is it?
What but the bones of the brother of the very ox you are eating?
And what do you pick your teeth with, after devouring that fat goose?
With a feather of the same fowl.
It was unsafe to meddle with the corpses and ghosts of these creatures.
It was a saturday night, and such a sabbath as followed!
Ex officio professors of sabbath breaking are all whalemen.
The ivory pequod was turned into what seemed a shamble every sailor a butcher.
I have had controversies about it with experienced whalemen afloat, and learned naturalists ashore.
My original opinion remains unchanged but it is only an opinion.
The question is, what and where is the skin of the whale?
Already you know what his blubber is.
I have several such dried bits, which i use for marks in my whale books.
But what i am driving at here is this.
But no more of this.
Like those mystic rocks, too, the mystic marked whale remains undecipherable.
This allusion to the indian rocks reminds me of another thing.
Like most sea terms, this one is very happy and significant.
Freeze his blood, and he dies.
Admire and model thyself after the whale!
Do thou, too, remain warm among ice.
Do thou, too, live in this world without being of it.
Be cool at the equator keep thy blood fluid at the pole.
Like the great dome of st. peter’s, and like the great whale, retain, o man!
In all seasons a temperature of thine own.
But how easy and how hopeless to teach these fine things!
Of erections, how few are domed like st. peter’s!
Of creatures, how few vast as the whale!
Let the carcase go astern!
The vast tackles have now done their duty.
For hours and hours from the almost stationary ship that hideous sight is seen.
There’s a most doleful and most mocking funeral!
Oh, horrible vultureism of earth!
From which not the mightiest whale is free.
Nor is this the end.
Desecrated as the body is, a vengeful ghost survives and hovers over it to scare.
Are you a believer in ghosts, my friend?
Silence reigned over the before tumultuous but now deserted deck.
A short space elapsed, and up into this noiselessness came ahab alone from his cabin.
Of all divers, thou hast dived the deepest.
That head upon which the upper sun now gleams, has moved amid this world’s foundations.
Cried a triumphant voice from the main mast head.
That lively cry upon this deadly calm might almost convert a better man.
Three points on the starboard bow, sir, and bringing down her breeze to us!
O nature, and o soul of man!
How far beyond all utterance are your linked analogies!
So the signal was set to see what response would be made.
But this did by no means prevent all communications.
A deep, settled, fanatic delirium was in his eyes.
So soon as this figure had been first descried, stubb had exclaimed that’s he!
The long togged scaramouch the town ho’s company told us of!
He announced himself as the archangel gabriel, and commanded the captain to jump overboard.
Moreover, they were afraid of him.
He was therefore forced to relinquish his plan.
Such things may seem incredible but, however wondrous, they are true.
But it is time to return to the pequod.
But now gabriel started to his feet.
Think, think of the fevers, yellow and bilious!
Beware of the horrible plague!
Hast thou seen the white whale?
Demanded ahab, when the boat drifted back.
Think, think of thy whale boat, stoven and sunk!
Beware of the horrible tail!
The whole calamity, with the falling form of macey, was plainly descried from the ship.
Raising a piercing shriek the vial!
Gabriel called off the terror stricken crew from the further hunting of the whale.
He became a nameless terror to the ship.
To which ahab answered aye.
Beware of the blasphemer’s end!
Starbuck, look over the bag.
Soon starbuck returned with a letter in his hand.
Of such a letter, death himself might well have been the post boy.
Aye, aye, it’s but a dim scrawl what’s this?
And from his wife, sighed mayhew but let me have it.
Nay, keep it thyself, cried gabriel to ahab thou art soon going that way.
It fell at ahab’s feet.
Now hands are wanted here, and then again hands are wanted there.
It is much the same with him who endeavors the description of the scene.
We must now retrace our way a little.
The whale, be it observed, lies almost entirely submerged, excepting the immediate parts operated upon.
You have seen italian organ boys holding a dancing ape by a long cord.
It was a humorously perilous business for both of us.
So, then, an elongated siamese ligature united us.
But this was not the only jamming jeopardy he was exposed to.
This procedure of theirs, to be sure, was very disinterested and benevolent of them.
There is good cheer in store for you, queequeg.
Hands him a cup of tepid ginger and water!
Suspiciously asked stubb, coming near.
Yes, this must be ginger, peering into the as yet untasted cup.
What the devil is ginger?
Will you look at that kannakin, sir smell of it, if you please.
Is the steward an apothecary, sir?
I trust not, said starbuck, it is poor stuff enough.
And run along with ye to the lockers, and get something better.
I hope i do no wrong, mr. starbuck.
It is the captain’s orders grog for the harpooneer on a whale.
What were you about saying, sir?
Only this go down with him, and get what thou wantest thyself.
Nor was this long wanting.
But it was only a few feet advance they sought to gain.
But i sometimes think he’ll charm the ship to no good at last.
I don’t half like that chap, stubb.
Flask, i take that fedallah to be the devil in disguise.
He’s the devil, i say.
He sleeps in his boots, don’t he?
What’s the old man have so much to do with him for?
Striking up a swap or a bargain, i suppose.
Stubb, you are skylarking how can fedallah do that?
Well, he was at home, and asked the devil what he wanted.
But look sharp ain’t you all ready there?
Well, then, pull ahead, and let’s get the whale alongside.
Adventures of those three bloody minded soldadoes?
Did ye read it there, flask?
No never saw such a book heard of it, though.
Am i the same man that helped kill this whale?
Doesn’t the devil live for ever who ever heard that the devil was dead?
Did you ever see any parson a wearing mourning for the devil?
Tell me that, mr. flask?
How old do you suppose fedallah is, stubb?
Do you see that mainmast there?
Nor all the coopers in creation couldn’t show hoops enough to make oughts enough.
Give him a good ducking, anyhow.
Duck him again and keep ducking him.
Damn the devil, flask so you suppose i’m afraid of the devil?
Do you suppose fedallah wants to kidnap captain ahab?
You’ll know it before long, flask.
And what will you do with the tail, stubb?
Sell it for an ox whip when we get home what else?
Now, do you mean what you say, and have been saying all along, stubb?
Mean or not mean, here we are at the ship.
Didn’t i tell you so?
Said flask yes, you’ll soon see this right whale’s head hoisted up opposite that parmacetti’s.
In good time, flask’s saying proved true.
Thus, some minds for ever keep trimming boat.
Throw all these thunder heads overboard, and then you will float light and right.
But nothing like this, in the present case, had been done.
They are the only whales regularly hunted by man.
In the first place, you are struck by the general contrast between these heads.
There is more character in the sperm whale’s head.
In short, he is what the fishermen technically call a grey headed whale.
But i must be content with a hint.
How is it, then, with the whale?
Nor, strictly investigated, is there any incongruity in this comparison.
But the ear of the whale is full as curious as the eye.
It is lodged a little behind the eye.
Why then do you try to enlarge your mind?
What a really beautiful and chaste looking mouth!
The jaw is afterwards sawn into slabs, and piled away like joists for building houses.
Look at that hanging lower lip!
What a huge sulk and pout is there!
A great pity, now, that this unfortunate whale should be hare lipped.
The fissure is about a foot across.
Over this lip, as over a slippery threshold, we now slide into the mouth.
Is this the road that jonah went?
In old times, there seem to have prevailed the most curious fancies concerning these blinds.
Sometimes these tufts impart a rather brigandish expression to his otherwise solemn countenance.
But in this particular, the demand has long been on the decline.
Again, the right whale has two external spout holes, the sperm whale only one.
Can you catch the expression of the sperm whale’s there?
But mark the other head’s expression.
So that this whole enormous boneless mass is as one wad.
It is as though the forehead of the sperm whale were paved with horses’ hoofs.
I do not think that any sensation lurks in it.
Bethink yourself also of another thing.
By itself this sufficiently illustrates the obvious fact i drive at.
For unless you own the whale, you are but a provincial and sentimentalist in truth.
What befell the weakling youth lifting the dread goddess’s veil at lais?
Now comes the baling of the case.
Quoin is not a euclidean term.
It belongs to the pure nautical mathematics.
I know not that it has been defined before.
Nor is this precious substance found unalloyed in any other part of the creature.
Cried daggoo, who amid the general consternation first came to his senses.
Swing the bucket this way!
Meantime, there was a terrible tumult.
In heaven’s name, man, cried stubb, are you ramming home a cartridge there?
How will that help him jamming that iron bound bucket on top of his head?
Stand clear of the tackle!
Cried a voice like the bursting of a rocket.
The next, a loud splash announced that my brave queequeg had dived to the rescue.
Now, how had this noble rescue been accomplished?
As for the great head itself, that was doing as well as could be expected.
Midwifery should be taught in the same course with fencing and boxing, riding and rowing.
But, peradventure, it may be sagaciously urged, how is this?
Yes, it was a running delivery, so it was.
How many, think ye, have likewise fallen into plato’s honey head, and sweetly perished there?
I try all things i achieve what i can.
Physiognomically regarded, the sperm whale is an anomalous creature.
He has no proper nose.
Dash the nose from phidias’s marble jove, and what a sorry remainder!
Nay, it is an added grandeur.
A nose to the whale would have been impertinent.
In thought, a fine human brow is like the east when troubled with the morning.
Pushing heavy cannon up mountain defiles, the elephant’s brow is majestic.
It signifies god done this day by my hand.
Genius in the sperm whale?
Has the sperm whale ever written a book, spoken a speech?
No, his great genius is declared in his doing nothing particular to prove it.
It is moreover declared in his pyramidical silence.
Champollion deciphered the wrinkled granite hieroglyphics.
Physiognomy, like every other human science, is but a passing fable.
I but put that brow before you.
Read it if you can.
In the full grown creature the skull will measure at least twenty feet in length.
It is a german conceit, that the vertebræ are absolutely undeveloped skulls.
I would rather feel your spine than your skull, whoever you are.
A thin joist of a spine never yet upheld a full and noble soul.
Apply this spinal branch of phrenology to the sperm whale.
And that the great monster is indomitable, you will yet have reason to know.
For some reason, the jungfrau seemed quite eager to pay her respects.
What has he in his hand there?
Cried starbuck, pointing to something wavingly held by the german.
He’s all right, is the yarman.
Go along with you, cried flask, it’s a lamp feeder and an oil can.
He’s out of oil, and has come a begging.
There were eight whales, an average pod.
Said stubb, he has the stomach ache, i’m afraid.
Lord, think of having half an acre of stomach ache!
Adverse winds are holding mad christmas in him, boys.
It must be, he’s lost his tiller.
Mind he don’t sling thee with it, cried starbuck.
Give way, or the german will have him.
The ungracious and ungrateful dog!
Then in his old intense whisper give way, greyhounds!
Are ye going to let that rascal beat ye?
A hogshead of brandy, then, to the best man.
Come, why don’t some of ye burst a blood vessel?
Who’s that been dropping an anchor overboard we don’t budge an inch we’re becalmed.
The short and long of it is, men, will ye spit fire or not?
See the suds he makes!
See that yarman oh, won’t ye pull for your duff, my lads such a sog!
There goes three thousand dollars, men!
Oh, do , do , do!
What’s that yarman about now?
Pull now, men, like fifty thousand line of battle ship loads of red haired devils.
I say, pull like god dam, cried the indian.
Hurrah for the white ash breeze!
It was a terrific, most pitiable, and maddening sight.
Blinding vapors of foam and white fire!
This is the way to sail now.
Here we go like three tin kettles at the tail of a mad cougar!
This whale carries the everlasting mail!
But the monster’s run was a brief one.
Giving a sudden gasp, he tumultuously sounded.
It must at least equal the weight of fifty atmospheres.
Not eight inches of perpendicular rope were visible at the bows.
To three bits of board.
Or his head with fish spears?
That unfulfilments should follow the prophets.
Cried starbuck again he’s rising.
His motions plainly denoted his extreme exhaustion.
His life, as they significantly call it, was untouched.
His eyes, or rather the places where his eyes had been, were beheld.
But pity there was none.
A nice spot, cried flask just let me prick him there once.
Cried starbuck, there’s no need of that!
But humane starbuck was too late.
It was his death stroke.
It was most piteous, that last expiring spout.
Who had darted that stone lance?
It might have been darted by some nor’ west indian long before america was discovered.
Meantime everything in the pequod was aslant.
The ship groaned and gasped.
Hold on, hold on, won’t ye?
By thunder, men, we must do something or go for it.
With a terrific snap, every fastening went adrift the ship righted, the carcase sank.
But it is not so.
Where one of that sort go down, twenty right whales do.
But the reason of this is obvious.
A line of battle ship could hardly keep him under then.
Many are the fin backs, and many are the dericks, my friend.
There are some enterprises in which a careful disorderliness is the true method.
When the romans took joppa, the same skeleton was carried to italy in triumph.
It nowhere appears that he ever actually harpooned his fish, unless, indeed, from the inside.
I claim him for one of our clan.
If i claim the demi god then, why not the prophet?
Nor do heroes, saints, demigods, and prophets alone comprise the whole roll of our order.
Was not this vishnoo a whaleman, then?
Even as a man who rides a horse is called a horseman?
Perseus, st. george, hercules, jonah, and vishnoo!
There’s a member roll for you!
What club but the whaleman’s can head off like that?
Now some nantucketers rather distrust this historical story of jonah and the whale.
But, to this, bishop jebb’s anticipative answer is ready.
And this seems reasonable enough in the good bishop.
Poor sag harbor, therefore, seems worsted all round.
But he had still another reason for his want of faith.
He might have carried him round by the way of the cape of good hope.
He seemed to be working in obedience to some particular presentiment.
Nor did it remain unwarranted by the event.
Nevertheless, the boats pursued, and stubb’s was foremost.
Such unintermitted strainings upon the planted iron must sooner or later inevitably extract it.
It became imperative to lance the flying whale, or be content to lose him.
Small sword, or broad sword, in all its exercises boasts nothing like it.
He minds you somewhat of a juggler, balancing a long staff on his chin.
Instead of sparkling water, he now spouts red blood.
That drove the spigot out of him!
’tis july’s immortal fourth all fountains must run wine today!
Would now, it were old orleans whiskey, or old ohio, or unspeakable old monongahela!
Let us, then, look at this matter, along with some interesting items contingent.
Wherefore the necessity for his periodical visits to the upper world.
That is to say, he would then live without breathing.
This is what i mean.
But the sperm whale only breathes about one seventh or sunday of his time.
Sure it is, nevertheless, that the sperm whale has no proper olfactories.
But what does he want of them?
No roses, no violets, no cologne water in the sea.
But then again, what has the whale to say?
Happy that the world is such an excellent listener!
But why pester one with all this reasoning on the subject?
I have ever found your plain things the knottiest of all.
Wherefore, among whalemen, the spout is deemed poisonous they try to evade it.
Still, we can hypothesize, even if we cannot prove and establish.
My hypothesis is this that the spout is nothing but mist.
He is both ponderous and profound.
For, d’ye see, rainbows do not visit the clear air they only irradiate vapor.
This triune structure, as much as anything else, imparts power to the tail.
Could annihilation occur to matter, this were the thing to do it.
On the contrary, those motions derive their most appalling beauty from it.
When angelo paints even god the father in human form, mark what robustness is there.
Therein no fairy’s arm can transcend it.
Five great motions are peculiar to it.
In man or fish, wriggling is a sign of inferiority.
To the whale, his tail is the sole means of propulsion.
His side fins only serve to steer by.
No ribs of man or boat can withstand it.
Some one strips off a frock, and the hole is stopped.
What tenderness there is in that preliminary touch!
But still you see his power in his play.
Out of the bottomless profundities the gigantic tail seems spasmodically snatching at the highest heaven.
But if i know not even the tail of this whale, how understand his head?
Much more, how comprehend his face, when face he has none?
In this zoned quest, does ahab touch no land?
Does his crew drink air?
Surely, he will stop for water.
Mark this, too, in the whaler.
She has a whole lake’s contents bottled in her ample hold.
She is ballasted with utilities not altogether with unusable pig lead and kentledge.
She carries years’ water in her.
Corresponding to the crescent in our van, we beheld another in our rear.
But this occasional timidity is characteristic of almost all herding creatures.
Nor were the oarsmen quite idle, though their wonted duty was now altogether dispensed with.
They chiefly attended to the shouting part of the business.
Out of the way, commodore!
Hard down with your tail, there!
All whaleboats carry certain curious contrivances, originally invented by the nantucket indians, called druggs.
It is chiefly among gallied whales that this drugg is used.
Hence it is, that at times like these the drugg, comes into requisition.
Our boat was furnished with three of them.
They were cramped like malefactors with the chain and ball.
Floating on their sides, the mothers also seemed quietly eyeing us.
Cried queequeg, looking over the gunwale him fast!
Two whale one big, one little!
Look e here, said queequeg, pointing down.
We saw young leviathan amours in the deep.
When overflowing with mutual esteem, the whales salute more hominum .
This terrific object seemed to recall the whole herd from their stationary fright.
Yes, the long calm was departing.
Instantly starbuck and queequeg changed places starbuck taking the stern.
He intensely whispered, seizing the helm gripe your oars, and clutch your souls, now!
My god, men, stand by!
Shove him off, you queequeg the whale there!
Stand up stand up, and stay so!
Spring, men pull, men never mind their backs scrape them!
Of all the drugged whales only one was captured.
Such bands are known as schools.
It is very curious to watch this harem and its lord in their indolent ramblings.
Like fashionables, they are for ever on the move in leisurely search of variety.
All fish bed in common.
Almost universally, a lone whale as a solitary leviathan is called proves an ancient one.
The forty barrel bull schools are larger than the harem schools.
Say you strike a forty barrel bull poor devil!
All his comrades quit him.
Perhaps the only formal whaling code authorized by legislative enactment, was that of holland.
A fast fish belongs to the party fast to it.
A loose fish is fair game for anybody who can soonest catch it.
First what is a fast fish?
But others are by no means so scrupulous.
Mr. erskine was counsel for the defendants lord ellenborough was the judge.
Now the defendants afterwards took the fish ergo, the aforesaid articles were theirs.
But often possession is the whole of the law.
What to the rapacious landlord is the widow’s last mite but a fast fish?
What are the duke of dunder’s hereditary towns and hamlets but fast fish?
What to that redoubted harpooneer, john bull, is poor ireland, but a fast fish?
What to that apostolic lancer, brother jonathan, is texas but a fast fish?
And concerning all these, is not possession the whole of the law?
That is internationally and universally applicable.
What was poland to the czar?
What greece to the turk?
What at last will mexico be to the united states?
What are the rights of man and the liberties of the world but loose fish?
What all men’s minds and opinions but loose fish?
What is the principle of religious belief in them but a loose fish?
What to the ostentatious smuggling verbalists are the thoughts of thinkers but loose fish?
What is the great globe itself but a loose fish?
And what are you, reader, but a loose fish and a fast fish, too?
De balena vero sufficit, si rex habeat caput, et regina caudam.
By some writers this office is called a sinecure.
This fish, my masters, is a fast fish.
I seize it as the lord warden’s.
But the duke had nothing to do with taking this fish?
Won’t the duke be content with a quarter or a half?
The law itself has already been set forth.
But plowdon gives us the reason for it.
But why should the king have the head, and the queen the tail?
A reason for that, ye lawyers!
But is the queen a mermaid, to be presented with a tail?
An allegorical meaning may lurk here.
And thus there seems a reason in all things, even in law.
A peculiar and not very pleasant smell was smelt in the sea.
I thought they would keel up before long.
I wonder now if our old man has thought of that.
Yes, i’m for it and so saying he started for the quarter deck.
A wooden rose bud, eh?
Are there any of you bouton de roses that speak english?
Well, then, my bouton de rose bud, have you seen the white whale?
The white whale a sperm whale moby dick, have ye seen him?
Never heard of such a whale.
Very good, then good bye now, and i’ll call again in a minute.
Upon which ahab retired, and stubb returned to the frenchman.
What’s the matter with your nose, there?
I wish it was broken, or that i didn’t have any nose at all!
But what are you holding yours for?
It’s a wax nose i have to hold it on.
What in the devil’s name do you want here?
Roared the guernseyman, flying into a sudden passion.
Why don’t you pack those whales in ice while you’re working at ’em?
As for that dried up one, there, he hasn’t a gill in his whole carcase.
There a queer scene presented itself.
All their noses upwardly projected from their faces like so many jib booms.
By this time their destined victim appeared from his cabin.
What shall i say to him first?
Upon this the captain started, and eagerly desired to know more.
Said the guernsey man to stubb.
In fact, tell him from me he’s a baboon.
Said the guernsey man, when the captain had returned to them.
He says, monsieur, that he’s very happy to have been of any service to us.
He wants you to take a glass of wine with him, said the interpreter.
In fact, tell him i must go.
And this, good friends, is ambergris, worth a gold guinea an ounce to any druggist.
Some wine merchants drop a few grains into claret, to flavor it.
But there is another thing to rebut.
They hint that all whales always smell bad.
Now how did this odious stigma originate?
What then shall i liken the sperm whale to for fragrance, considering his magnitude?
Now, in the whale ship, it is not every one that goes in the boats.
Had turned the round horizon into one star belled tambourine.
But let us to the story.
Tashtego stood in the bows.
He was full of the fire of the hunt.
He hated pip for a poltroon.
Meantime pip’s blue, choked face plainly looked, do, for god’s sake!
All passed in a flash.
In less than half a minute, this entire thing happened.
Roared stubb and so the whale was lost and pip was saved.
Bear that in mind, and don’t jump any more.
But we are all in the hands of the gods and pip jumped again.
Stubb was but too true to his word.
No boat knife was lifted when he fell so rapidly astern.
Stubb’s inexorable back was turned upon him and the whale was winged.
In three minutes, a whole mile of shoreless ocean was between pip and stubb.
But the awful lonesomeness is intolerable.
The intense concentration of self in the middle of such a heartless immensity, my god!
But had stubb really abandoned the poor little negro to his fate?
No he did not mean to, at least.
For the rest, blame not stubb too hardly.
It was our business to squeeze these lumps back into fluid.
A sweet and unctuous duty!
No wonder that in old times this sperm was such a favourite cosmetic.
Would that i could keep squeezing that sperm for ever!
It is tough with congealed tendons a wad of muscle but still contains some oil.
They look much like blocks of berkshire marble.
It is a most refreshing, convivial, beautiful object to behold.
It is plums of rubies, in pictures of citron.
Spite of reason, it is hard to keep yourself from eating it.
I confess, that once i stole behind the foremast to try it.
I hold it to be the wondrously thin, ruptured membranes of the case, coalescing.
Strictly this word is not indigenous to the whale’s vocabulary.
But as applied by whalemen, it becomes so.
They generally go in pairs, a pike and gaffman and a spade man.
The whaling pike is similar to a frigate’s boarding weapon of the same name.
The gaff is something like a boat hook.
Toes are scarce among veteran blubber room men.
And an idol, indeed, it is or, rather, in old times, its likeness was.
The mincer now stands before you invested in the full canonicals of his calling.
This is the invariable cry from the mates to the mincer.
Besides her hoisted boats, an american whaler is outwardly distinguished by her try works.
When not in use, they are kept remarkably clean.
It is a place also for profound mathematical meditation.
These mouths are fitted with heavy doors of iron.
There are no external chimneys they open direct from the rear wall.
And here let us go back for a moment.
It belonged to stubb to oversee the business.
Off hatch, then, and start her.
You cook, fire the works.
These fritters feed the flames.
Would that he consumed his own smoke!
By midnight the works were in full operation.
The burning ship drove on, as if remorselessly commissioned to some vengeful deed.
The smoke rolled away in sullen heaps.
This served for a sea sofa.
But that night, in particular, a strange thing occurred to me.
Starting from a brief standing sleep, i was horribly conscious of something fatally wrong.
A stark, bewildered feeling, as of death, came over me.
What is the matter with me?
Look not too long in the face of the fire, o man!
Never dream with thy hand on the helm!
This wilful world hath not got hold of unchristian solomon’s wisdom yet.
There is a wisdom that is woe but there is a woe that is madness.
In merchantmen, oil for the sailor is more scarce than the milk of queens.
But the whaleman, as he seeks the food of light, so he lives in light.
It is sweet as early grass butter in april.
Never more to rise and blow.
This done, the hatches are replaced, and hermetically closed, like a closet walled up.
The unmanufactured sperm oil possesses a singularly cleansing virtue.
The soot is brushed from the lower rigging.
They know not the thing you distantly allude to.
Away, and bring us napkins!
My friends, but this is man killing!
On its round border it bore the letters, republica del ecuador quito.
Before this equatorial coin, ahab, not unobserved by others, was now pausing.
Methinks now this coined sun wears a ruddy face but see!
Aye, he enters the sign of storms, the equinox!
And but six months before he wheeled out of a former equinox at aries!
Born in throes, ’tis fit that man should live in pains and die in pangs!
Here’s stout stuff for woe to work on.
The old man seems to read belshazzar’s awful writing.
I have never marked the coin inspectingly.
He goes below let me read.
This coin speaks wisely, mildly, truly, but still sadly to me.
I will quit it, lest truth shake me falsely.
In my poor, insignificant opinion, i regard this as queer.
Let me read it once.
Here’s signs and wonders truly!
Signs and wonders and the sun, he’s always among ’em.
Here’s gemini himself, or the twins.
Well the sun he wheels among ’em.
You lie there the fact is, you books must know your places.
Pity if there is nothing wonderful in signs, and significant in wonders!
There’s a clue somewhere wait a bit hist hark!
By jove, i have it!
As we pluck out the shafts, stand aside!
Oh, jolly’s the word for aye!
There he’s before it he’ll out with something presently.
So, what’s all this staring been about?
He’s muttering voice like an old worn out coffee mill.
Now, in what sign will the sun then be?
The horse shoe sign for there it is, right opposite the gold.
And what’s the horse shoe sign?
The lion is the horse shoe sign the roaring and devouring lion.
My old head shakes to think of thee.
There’s another rendering now but still one text.
All sorts of men in one kind of world, you see.
Here comes queequeg all tattooing looks like the signs of the zodiac himself.
What does he say, with that look of his?
This way comes pip poor boy!
Would he had died, or i he’s half horrible to me.
Stand away again and hear him.
I look, you look, he looks we look, ye look, they look.
Upon my soul, he’s been studying murray’s grammar!
Improving his mind, poor fellow!
But what’s that he says now hist!
Why, he’s getting it by heart hist!
And where’s the scare crow?
Wonder if he means me?
I could go hang myself.
Any way, for the present, i’ll quit pip’s vicinity.
So, so, i leave him muttering.
But, unscrew your navel, and what’s the consequence?
The white whale he’ll nail ye!
This is a pine tree.
How did it get there?
The green miser’ll hoard ye soon!
God goes ’mong the worlds blackberrying.
Hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, jenny, jenny!
And get your hoe cake done!
The pequod, of nantucket, meets the samuel enderby, of london.
Hast seen the white whale?
Cried ahab, impetuously, and tossing about the oars near him stand by to lower!
But here a curious difficulty presented itself.
Jump, boys, and swing over the cutting tackle.
Let us shake bones together!
An arm and a leg!
An arm that never can shrink, d’ye see and a leg that never can run.
Where did’st thou see the white whale?
And he took that arm off, did he?
Aye, he was the cause of it, at least and that leg, too?
Spin me the yarn, said ahab how was it?
I was ignorant of the white whale at that time.
It was he, it was he!
Cried ahab, suddenly letting out his suspended breath.
And harpoons sticking in near his starboard fin.
Aye, aye they were mine my irons, cried ahab, exultingly but on!
Give me a chance, then, said the englishman, good humoredly.
Wanted to part it free the fast fish an old trick i know him.
Instead of the other whale’s that went off to windward, all fluking.
Now, bunger boy, spin your part of the yarn.
He sat up with me indeed, and was very severe in my diet.
A great watcher, and very dietetically severe, is dr. bunger.
Yes, i may as well, said the surgeon, coolly.
I measured it with the lead line.
In short, it grew black i knew what was threatened, and off it came.
He flies into diabolical passions sometimes.
No, i don’t, said the captain, but his mother did he was born with it.
Oh, you solemn rogue, you you bunger!
Was there ever such another bunger in the watery world?
What became of the white whale?
Cried the one armed captain, oh, yes!
Did’st thou cross his wake again?
Didn’t want to try to ain’t one limb enough?
What should i do without this other arm?
And i’m thinking moby dick doesn’t bite so much as he swallows.
Well, then, interrupted bunger, give him your left arm for bait to get the right.
And he knows it too.
So that what you take for the white whale’s malice is only his awkwardness.
Glancing at the ivory leg.
But he will still be hunted, for all that.
What is best let alone, that accursed thing is not always what least allures.
How long since thou saw’st him last?
It’s at the boiling point!
His pulse makes these planks beat!
Taking a lancet from his pocket, and drawing near to ahab’s arm.
Roared ahab, dashing him against the bulwarks man the boat!
Cried the english captain, to whom the question was put.
He was heading east, i think.
In vain the english captain hailed him.
The syren in this famous voyage was commanded by a captain coffin, a nantucketer.
A short life to them, and a jolly death.
Did i say we had flip?
The beef was fine tough, but with body in it.
They had dumplings too small, but substantial, symmetrically globular, and indestructible dumplings.
The abounding good cheer of these english whalers is matter for historical research.
Yet they did aim at them, and hit them too.
And this empties the decanter.
It was a wondrous sight.
What palace may it deck?
Wherefore all these ceaseless toilings?
But one single word with thee!
For even so it is in all material factories.
Thereby have villainies been detected.
I saw no living thing within naught was there but bones.
Cutting me a green measuring rod, i once more dived within the skeleton.
They shouted dar’st thou measure this our god!
Aye, priests well, how long do ye make him, then?
These admeasurements i now propose to set before you.
Because there are skeleton authorities you can refer to, to test my accuracy.
Such a statement may prove useful here.
The ribs were ten on a side.
In general thickness, they all bore a seemly correspondence to their length.
The middle ribs were the most arched.
But now it’s done, it looks much like pompey’s pillar.
Would you, you could not compress him.
By good rights he should only be treated of in imperial folio.
But when leviathan is the text, the case is altered.
Fain am i to stagger to this emprise under the weightiest words of the dictionary.
How, then, with me, writing of this leviathan?
Unconsciously my chirography expands into placard capitals.
Give me a condor’s quill!
Give me vesuvius’ crater for an inkstand!
Such, and so magnifying, is the virtue of a large and liberal theme!
We expand to its bulk.
To produce a mighty book, you must choose a mighty theme.
Cuvier pronounced these fragments to have belonged to some utterly unknown leviathanic species.
Who can show a pedigree like leviathan?
Ahab’s harpoon had shed older blood than the pharaoh’s.
Methuselah seems a school boy.
I look round to shake hands with shem.
This rib is said to have layn there a hundred years before i saw it.
But will any whaleman believe these stories?
The whale of to day is as big as his ancestors in pliny’s time.
But still another inquiry remains one often agitated by the more recondite nantucketers.
But you must look at this matter in every light.
But, in the end, it all came out this one matter did, at least.
That direful mishap was at the bottom of his temporary recluseness.
An oarsman sprains his wrist the carpenter concocts a soothing lotion.
The deck first night watch.
Drat the file, and drat the bone!
That is hard which should be soft, and that is soft which should be hard.
So we go, who file old jaws and shinbones.
Aye, now, this works better .
This is what an old fellow gets now for working in dead lumber.
If the captain pleases, i will now mark the length.
Well, it’s not the first time.
There keep thy finger on it.
This is a cogent vice thou hast here, carpenter let me feel its grip once.
So, so it does pinch some.
Oh, sir, it will break bones beware, beware!
The blacksmith, i mean what’s he about?
He must be forging the buckle screw, sir, now.
It’s a partnership he supplies the muscle part.
He makes a fierce red flame there!
Aye, sir he must have the white heat for this kind of fine work.
Um m. so he must.
This must be the remainder the greek made the africans of.
Hold while prometheus is about it, i’ll order a complete man after a desirable pattern.
No, but put a sky light on top of his head to illuminate inwards.
There, take the order, and away.
Now, what’s he speaking about, and who’s he speaking to, i should like to know?
Shall i keep standing here?
’tis but indifferent architecture to make a blind dome here’s one.
No, no, no i must have a lantern.
Here are two, sir one will serve my turn.
What art thou thrusting that thief catcher into my face for, man?
Thrusted light is worse than presented pistols.
I thought, sir, that you spoke to carpenter.
That’s mud we leave clay to ditchers, sir.
What art thou sneezing about?
Bone is rather dusty, sir.
I guess so yes oh, dear!
Look ye, carpenter, i dare say thou callest thyself a right good workmanlike workman, eh?
Canst thou not drive that old adam away?
Truly, sir, i begin to understand somewhat now.
May i humbly ask if it be really so, sir?
I should humbly call it a poser, sir.
In thy most solitary hours, then, dost thou not fear eavesdroppers?
Look ye, pudding heads should never grant premises.
How long before the leg is done?
Bungle away at it then, and bring it to me .
Cursed be that mortal inter indebtedness which will not do away with ledgers.
I would be free as air and i’m down in the whole world’s books.
Yes, now that i think of it, here’s his bedfellow!
Has a stick of whale’s jaw bone for a wife!
And this is his leg he’ll stand on this.
I don’t wonder he looked so scornful at me!
I’m a sort of strange thoughted sometimes, they say but that’s only haphazard like.
And here’s the heron’s leg!
Long and slim, sure enough!
But ahab oh he’s a hard driver.
What a leg this is!
I almost forgot the little oval slate, smoothed ivory, where he figures up the latitude.
So, so chisel, file, and sand paper, now!
According to usage they were pumping the ship next morning and lo!
Hearing the footstep at the door, but not turning round to it.
Captain ahab mistakes it is i.
The oil in the hold is leaking, sir.
We must up burtons and break out.
Up burtons and break out?
What we come twenty thousand miles to get is worth saving, sir.
So it is, so it is if we get it.
I was speaking of the oil in the hold, sir.
And i was not speaking or thinking of that at all.
I’ll not have the burtons hoisted.
What will the owners say, sir?
Let the owners stand on nantucket beach and outyell the typhoons.
Dost thou then so much as dare to critically think of me?
Nay, sir, not yet i do entreat.
And i do dare, sir to be forbearing!
Shall we not understand each other better than hitherto, captain ahab?
He waxes brave, but nevertheless obeys most careful bravery that!
Murmured ahab, as starbuck disappeared.
What’s that he said ahab beware of ahab there’s something there!
However it was, his orders were executed and the burtons were hoisted.
Top heavy was the ship as a dinnerless student with all aristotle in his head.
Well was it that the typhoons did not visit them then.
To be short, among whalemen, the harpooneers are the holders, so called.
He’ll have to die now, ejaculated the long island sailor.
This done, he marshalled the planks and his tools, and to work.
Leaning over in his hammock, queequeg long regarded the coffin with an attentive eye.
Rarmai , he murmured at last, and signed to be replaced in his hammock.
Will ye never have done with all this weary roving?
If ye find him, then comfort him for he must be very sad for look!
He’s left his tambourine behind i found it.
Rig a dig, dig, dig!
Now, queequeg, die and i’ll beat ye your dying march.
Where learned he that, but there?
He speaks again but more wildly now.
Let’s make a general of him!
Oh for a game cock now to sit upon his head and crow!
Mind ye that queequeg dies game!
Take ye good heed of that queequeg dies game!
I say game, game, game!
But base little pip, he died a coward died all a’shiver out upon pip!
Tell them he jumped from a whale boat!
Shame upon all cowards shame upon them!
Let ’em go drown like pip, that jumped from a whale boat.
During all this, queequeg lay with closed eyes, as if in a dream.
Pip was led away, and the sick man was replaced in his hammock.
The white whale spouts thick blood!
Nevertheless, this old man’s was a patient hammer wielded by a patient arm.
No murmur, no impatience, no petulance did come from him.
The issue was, the loss of the extremities of both feet.
It was the bottle conjuror!
Oh, death, why canst thou not sometimes be timely?
Put up thy gravestone, too, within the churchyard, and come hither, till we marry thee!
And so perth went a whaling.
Are these thy mother carey’s chickens, perth?
Thy shrunk voice sounds too calmly, sanely woeful to me.
Thou should’st go mad, blacksmith say, why dost thou not go mad?
How can’st thou endure without being mad?
Do the heavens yet hate thee, that thou can’st not go mad?
What wert thou making there?
Welding an old pike head, sir there were seams and dents in it.
Aye, sir, i think i can all seams and dents but one.
Can’st thou smoothe this seam?
That is the one, sir!
Said i not all seams and dents but one?
But, away with child’s play no more gaffs and pikes to day.
Jingling the leathern bag, as if it were full of gold coins.
There’s the stuff, flinging the pouch upon the anvil.
Work that over again, perth.
But, as ahab looked up, he slid aside.
What’s that bunch of lucifers dodging about there for?
Muttered stubb, looking on from the forecastle.
Would’st thou brand me, perth?
Pray god, not that yet i fear something, captain ahab.
Is not this harpoon for the white whale?
But now for the barbs thou must make them thyself, man.
No, no no water for that i want it of the true death temper.
Will ye give me as much blood as will cover this barb?
A cluster of dark nods replied, yes.
Ego non baptizo te in nomine patris, sed in nomine diaboli!
Deliriously howled ahab, as the malignant iron scorchingly devoured the baptismal blood.
And now for the seizings.
Would to god these blessed calms would last.
Where lies the final harbor, whence we unmoor no more?
In what rapt ether sails the world, of which the weariest will never weary?
Where is the foundling’s father hidden?
Tell me not of thy teeth tiered sharks, and thy kidnapping cannibal ways.
Let faith oust fact let fancy oust memory i look deep down and do believe.
Signals, ensigns, and jacks of all colours were flying from her rigging, on every side.
Cried the gay bachelor’s commander, lifting a glass and a bottle in the air.
Thou art too damned jolly.
I’ll soon take that black from your brow.
Come along, will ye a full ship and homeward bound.
How wondrous familiar is a fool!
So go thy ways, and i will mine.
Set all sail, and keep her to the wind!
So seemed it with the pequod.
He too worships fire most faithful, broad, baronial vassal of the sun!
Oh that these too favouring eyes should see these too favouring sights.
No sooner dead, than death whirls round the corpse, and it heads some other way.
Oh, trebly hooped and welded hip of power!
Oh, high aspiring, rainbowed jet!
That one strivest, this one jettest all in vain!
Yet dost thou, darker half, rock me with a prouder, if a darker faith.
I have dreamed it again, said he.
Have i not said, old man, that neither hearse nor coffin can be thine?
And who are hearsed that die on the sea?
Such a sight we shall not soon see.
Believe it or not, thou canst not die till it be seen, old man.
And what was that saying about thyself?
Though it come to the last, i shall still go before thee thy pilot.
Well, then, did i believe all ye say, oh my pilot!
I have here two pledges that i shall yet slay moby dick and survive it.
Both were silent again, as one man.
In good time the order came.
Now, in that japanese sea, the days in summer are as freshets of effulgences.
Thou high and mighty pilot!
Or canst thou tell where some other thing besides me is this moment living?
This instant thou must be eyeing him.
But all their pains seemed naught.
Mr. starbuck, said stubb, regarding the wreck, but the sea will have its way.
Stubb, for one, can’t fight it.
But never mind it’s all in fun so the old song says oh!
Look through my eyes if thou hast none of thine own.
The very course he swung to this day noon?
Now mark his boat there where is that stove?
Now jump overboard, and sing away, if thou must!
I don’t half understand ye what’s in the wind?
Drop them over, fore and aft.
Cried ahab let’s have fair play here, though we be the weaker side.
A moment or two passed, when starbuck, going forward, pushed against some one.
But do they only have mercy on long faces?
Have they no bowels for a laugh?
And look ye, mr. starbuck but it’s too dark to look.
At that moment starbuck caught sight of stubb’s face slowly beginning to glimmer into sight.
Glancing upwards, he cried see!
The corpusants have mercy on us all, cried stubb, again.
No fearless fool now fronts thee.
In the midst of the personified impersonal, a personality stands here.
But war is pain, and hate is woe.
I own thy speechless, placeless power said i not so?
Nor was it wrung from me nor do i now drop these links.
Thou canst blind but i can then grope.
Thou canst consume but i can then be ashes.
Take the homage of these poor eyes, and shutter hands.
I would not take it.
Yet blindfold, yet will i talk to thee.
The javelins cease open eyes see, or not?
Now i do glory in my genealogy.
But thou art but my fiery father my sweet mother, i know not.
What hast thou done with her?
There lies my puzzle but thine is greater.
I know that of me, which thou knowest not of thyself, oh, thou omnipotent.
Through thee, thy flaming self, my scorched eyes do dimly see it.
Here again with haughty agony, i read my sire.
Leap up, and lick the sky!
Cried starbuck, look at thy boat, old man!
And with one blast of his breath he extinguished the flame.
Ahab standing by the helm.
We must send down the main top sail yard, sir.
The band is working loose and the lee lift is half stranded.
Shall i strike it, sir?
If i had sky sail poles, i’d sway them up now.
The anchors are working, sir.
Shall i get them inboard?
Strike nothing, and stir nothing, but lash everything.
The wind rises, but it has not got up to my table lands yet.
Quick, and see to it.
He takes me for the hunch backed skipper of some coasting smack.
Send down my main top sail yard!
Oh, none but cowards send down their brain trucks in tempest time.
What a hooroosh aloft there!
Oh, take medicine, take medicine!
Stubb and flask mounted on them, and passing additional lashings over the anchors there hanging.
And how long ago is it since you said the very contrary?
Stop, now didn’t you say so?
I’ve part changed my flesh since that time, why not my mind?
Why, my little man, you have pretty red hair, but you couldn’t get afire now.
But hark, again, and i’ll answer ye the other thing.
What are you talking about, then?
Why don’t ye be sensible, flask?
It’s easy to be sensible why don’t ye, then?
Any man with half an eye can be sensible.
I don’t know that, stubb.
You sometimes find it rather hard.
Yes, when a fellow’s soaked through, it’s hard to be sensible, that’s a fact.
And i am about drenched with this spray.
Never mind catch the turn there, and pass it.
Tying these two anchors here, flask, seems like tying a man’s hands behind him.
And what big generous hands they are, to be sure.
These are your iron fists, hey?
What a hold they have, too!
There, hammer that knot down, and we’ve done.
So next to touching land, lighting on deck is the most satisfactory.
I say, just wring out my jacket skirts, will ye?
The tails tapering down that way, serve to carry off the water, d’ye see.
Same with cocked hats the cocks form gable end eave troughs, flask.
This is a nasty night, lad.
The main top sail yard .
Tashtego passing new lashings around it .
Plenty too much thunder up here.
What’s the use of thunder?
We don’t want thunder we want rum give us a glass of rum.
For during the violence of the gale, he had only steered according to its vicissitudes.
The wind seemed coming round astern aye, the foul breeze became fair!
Instantly the yards were squared, to the lively song of ho!
Oh ye ho, cheerly men!
Ere knocking at his state room, he involuntarily paused before it a moment.
Aye, aye and powder in the pan that’s not good.
I’ll cure myself of this.
I’ll hold the musket boldly while i think.
I come to report a fair wind to him.
Fair for death and doom, that’s fair for moby dick.
It’s a fair wind that’s only fair for that accursed fish.
The very tube he pointed at me!
Aye and he would fain kill all his crew.
Does he not say he will not strike his spars to any gale?
Has he not dashed his heavenly quadrant?
If, then, he were this instant put aside, that crime would not be his.
Is he muttering in his sleep?
Yes, just there, in there, he’s sleeping.
Aye, but still alive, and soon awake again.
I can’t withstand thee, then, old man.
Not reasoning not remonstrance not entreaty wilt thou hearken to all this thou scornest.
Flat obedience to thy own flat commands, this is all thou breathest.
Aye, and say’st the men have vow’d thy vow say’st all of us are ahabs.
But is there no other way?
Make him a prisoner to be taken home?
Hope to wrest this old man’s living power from his own living hands?
Only a fool would try it.
The land is hundreds of leagues away, and locked japan the nearest.
On this level, ahab’s hammock swings within his head this way.
A touch, and starbuck may survive to hug his wife and child again.
Great god, where art thou?
Oh moby dick, i clutch thy heart at last!
He’s too sound asleep, mr. stubb go thou down, and wake him, and tell him.
I must see to the deck here.
Thou know’st what to say.
Emblazonings, as of crowned babylonian kings and queens, reigned over everything.
Thou mightest well be taken now for the sea chariot of the sun.
All ye nations before my prow, i bring the sun to ye!
Yoke on the further billows hallo!
A tandem, i drive the sea!
East sou east, sir, said the frightened steersman.
Smiting him with his clenched fist.
Heading east at this hour in the morning, and the sun astern?
Standing behind him starbuck looked, and lo!
The two compasses pointed east, and the pequod was as infallibly going west.
Mr. starbuck, last night’s thunder turned our compasses that’s all.
Thou hast before now heard of such a thing, i take it.
Aye but never before has it happened to me, sir, said the pale mate, gloomily.
For a space the old man walked the deck in rolling reveries.
Thou poor, proud heaven gazer and sun’s pilot!
Yesterday i wrecked thee, and to day the compasses would fain have wrecked me.
But ahab is lord over the level loadstone yet.
The sun is east, and that compass swears it!
It had been thus with the pequod.
The ship was sailing plungingly astern the billows rolled in riots.
The golden hued tahitian and the grizzly manxman.
Take the reel, one of ye, i’ll heave.
Long heat and wet, have they spoiled thee?
Or, truer perhaps, life holds thee not thou it.
I hold the spool, sir.
But just as my captain says.
In the little rocky isle of man, sir.
Thou’st hit the world by that.
I know not, sir, but i was born there.
In the isle of man, hey?
Well, the other way, it’s good.
The dead, blind wall butts all inquiring heads at last.
The overstrained line sagged down in one long festoon the tugging log was gone.
But ahab can mend all.
Haul in here, tahitian reel up, manxman.
And look ye, let the carpenter make another log, and mend thou the line.
Haul in, haul in, tahitian!
These lines run whole, and whirling out come in broken, and dragging slow.
Come to help eh, pip?
Pip jumped from the whale boat.
Let’s see now if ye haven’t fished him up here, fisherman.
It drags hard i guess he’s holding on.
Jerk him off we haul in no cowards here.
There’s his arm just breaking water.
Cut it off we haul in no cowards here.
Here’s pip, trying to get on board again.
Peace, thou crazy loon, cried the manxman, seizing him by the arm.
Away from the quarter deck!
The greater idiot ever scolds the lesser, muttered ahab, advancing.
Hands off from that holiness!
Where sayest thou pip was, boy?
And who art thou, boy?
I see not my reflection in the vacant pupils of thy eyes.
That man should be a thing for immortal souls to sieve through!
Bell boy, sir ship’s crier ding, dong, ding!
Who’s seen pip the coward?
There can be no hearts above the snow line.
Ye did beget this luckless child, and have abandoned him, ye creative libertines.
Here, boy ahab’s cabin shall be pip’s home henceforth, while ahab lives.
Here’s velvet shark skin, intently gazing at ahab’s hand, and feeling it.
Come, then, to my cabin.
Ye believers in gods all goodness, and in man all ill, lo you!
I feel prouder leading thee by thy black hand, than though i grasped an emperor’s!
There go two daft ones now, muttered the old manxman.
One daft with strength, the other daft with weakness.
But here’s the end of the rotten line all dripping, too.
I think we had best have a new line altogether.
I’ll see mr. stubb about it.
He hollowly laughed, and thus explained the wonder.
In the sea, under certain circumstances, seals have more than once been mistaken for men.
But few, perhaps, thought of that at the time.
But again the old manxman said nay.
A life buoy of a coffin!
Rather queer, that, i should say, said stubb.
Bring it up there’s nothing else for it, said starbuck, after a melancholy pause.
Rig it, carpenter do not look at me so the coffin, i mean.
And shall i nail down the lid, sir?
Moving his hand as with a hammer.
And shall i caulk the seams, sir?
Moving his hand as with a caulking iron.
And shall i then pay over the same with pitch, sir?
Moving his hand as with a pitch pot.
What possesses thee to this?
Make a life buoy of the coffin, and no more.
Mr. stubb, mr. flask, come forward with me.
He goes off in a huff.
The whole he can endure at the parts he baulks.
Now i don’t like this.
Are all my pains to go for nothing with that coffin?
And now i’m ordered to make a life buoy of it.
Let tinkers’ brats do tinkerings we are their betters.
It’s the old woman’s tricks to be giving cobbling jobs.
What an affection all old women have for tinkers.
There are no caps at sea but snow caps.
Were ever such things done before with a coffin?
But i’m made of knotty aroostook hemlock i don’t budge.
Sailing about with a grave yard tray!
I’ll do the job, now, tenderly.
I’ll have me let’s see how many in the ship’s company, all told?
Come hammer, caulking iron, pitch pot, and marling spike!
Ahab comes slowly from the cabin gangway, and hears pip following him.
Back, lad i will be with ye again presently.
Not this hand complies with my humor more genially than that boy.
Middle aisle of a church!
Thy coffin lies handy to the vault.
So it does, sir, so it does.
Art not thou the leg maker?
Look, did not this stump come from thy shop?
I believe it did, sir does the ferrule stand, sir?
But art thou not also the undertaker?
But i do not mean anything, sir.
I do as i do.
Hark ye, dost thou not ever sing working about a coffin?
But the caulking mallet is full of it.
And yet, a coffin with a body in it rings pretty much the same, carpenter.
Why, faith, sir, it’s only a sort of exclamation like that’s all, sir.
I was about to say, sir, that art thou a silk worm?
Dost thou spin thy own shroud out of thyself?
And get these traps out of sight.
That was sudden, now but squalls come sudden in hot latitudes.
He’s always under the line fiery hot, i tell ye!
He’s looking this way come, oakum quick.
This wooden mallet is the cork, and i’m the professor of musical glasses tap, tap!
The greyheaded woodpecker tapping the hollow tree!
Blind and dumb might well be envied now.
That thing rests on two line tubs, full of tow lines.
A most malicious wag, that fellow.
How immaterial are all materials!
What things real are there, but imponderable thoughts?
Will ye never have done, carpenter, with that accursed sound?
I go below let me not see that thing here when i return again.
Now, then, pip, we’ll talk this over i do suck most wondrous philosophies from thee!
Some unknown conduits from the unknown worlds must empty into thee!
Bad news she brings bad news, muttered the old manxman.
Have ye seen a whale boat adrift?
Immediately he was recognised by ahab for a nantucketer he knew.
But no formal salutation was exchanged.
There was some apprehension, but no positive alarm, as yet.
Cried stubb, oh, it’s his son he’s lost!
I take back the coat and watch what says ahab?
We must save that boy.
I will not go, said the stranger, till you say aye to me.
Do to me as you would have me do to you in the like case.
Even now i lose time.
God bless ye, man, and may i forgive myself, but i must go.
She was rachel, weeping for her children, because they were not.
Lad, lad, i tell thee thou must not follow ahab now.
There is that in thee, poor lad, which i feel too curing to my malady.
Like cures like and for this hunt, my malady becomes my most desired health.
Spite of million villains, this makes me a bigot in the fadeless fidelity of man!
But methinks like cures like applies to him too he grows so sane again.
But i will never desert ye, sir, as stubb did him.
Sir, i must go with ye.
If thou speakest thus to me much more, ahab’s purpose keels up in him.
I tell thee no it cannot be.
Oh good master, master, master!
Weep so, and i will murder thee!
Have a care, for ahab too is mad.
And now i quit thee.
True art thou, lad, as the circumference to its centre.
Here he this instant stood i stand in his air, but i’m alone.
Now were even poor pip here i could endure it, but he’s missing.
He must be up here let’s try the door.
Neither lock, nor bolt, nor bar and yet there’s no opening it.
The epaulets all come crowding!
Pass round the decanters glad to see ye fill up, monsieurs!
Monsieurs, have ye seen one pip?
A little negro lad, five feet high, hang dog look, and cowardly!
Jumped from a whale boat once seen him?
Well then, fill up again, captains, and let’s drink shame upon all cowards!
Put one foot upon the table.
Above there, i hear ivory oh, master!
I am indeed down hearted when you walk over me.
In this foreshadowing interval too, all humor, forced or natural, vanished.
Stubb no more strove to raise a smile starbuck no more strove to check one.
And that shadow was always hovering there.
For be this parsee what he may, all rib and keel was solid ahab.
I will have the first sight of the whale myself, he said.
Ahab must have the doubloon!
Your hat, your hat, sir!
But only by the replacing of the cap was that omen accounted good.
Then turning to his crew are ye ready there?
Place the plank then on the rail, and lift the body so, then oh!
Cried ahab like lightning to his men.
Cried a foreboding voice in her wake.
It was a clear steel blue day.
Oh, immortal infancy, and innocency of the azure!
Invisible winged creatures that frolic all round us!
Sweet childhood of air and sky!
How oblivious were ye of old ahab’s close coiled woe!
It is a mild, mild wind, and a mild looking sky.
Forty forty forty years ago!
Forty years of continual whaling!
Forty years of privation, and peril, and storm time!
Forty years on the pitiless sea!
Aye and yes, starbuck, out of those forty years i have not spent three ashore.
Guinea coast slavery of solitary command!
Rather a widow with her husband alive!
What a forty years’ fool fool old fool, has old ahab been!
Why this strife of the chase?
Why weary, and palsy the arm at the oar, and the iron, and the lance?
How the richer or better is ahab now?
Here, brush this old hair aside it blinds me, that i seem to weep.
Locks so grey did never grow but from out some ashes!
But do i look very old, so very, very old, starbuck?
By the green land by the bright hearth stone!
No, no stay on board, on board!
Lower not when i do when branded ahab gives chase to moby dick.
That hazard shall not be thine.
Not with the far away home i see in that eye!
Grand old heart, after all!
Why should any one give chase to that hated fish!
Let us fly these deadly waters!
This instant let me alter the course!
I think, sir, they have some such mild blue days, even as this, in nantucket.
I have seen them some summer days in the morning.
’tis my mary, my mary herself!
Come, my captain, study out the course, and let us away!
The boy’s face from the window!
The boy’s hand on the hill!
Is it i, god, or who, that lifts this arm?
And all the time, lo!
That smiling sky, and this unsounded sea!
Who put it into him to chase and fang that flying fish?
Where do murderers go, man!
Who’s to doom, when the judge himself is dragged to the bar?
Aye, toil we how we may, we all sleep at last on the field.
But blanched to a corpse’s hue with despair, the mate had stolen away.
Fedallah was motionlessly leaning over the same rail.
He declared that a whale must be near.
Cried ahab, flattening his face to the sky.
Was the sound hailing down in reply.
Alow and aloft, and on both sides!
A hump like a snow hill!
And did none of ye see it before?
Cried ahab, hailing the perched men all around him.
I only none of ye could have raised the white whale first.
Mr. starbuck, remember, stay on board, and keep the ship.
No, no only black water!
All ready the boats there?
Lower me, mr. starbuck lower, lower, quick, quicker!
And he slid through the air to the deck.
A pale, death glimmer lit up fedallah’s sunken eyes a hideous motion gnawed his mouth.
He saw the vast, involved wrinkles of the slightly projecting head beyond.
A gentle joyousness a mighty mildness of repose in swiftness, invested the gliding whale.
Did surpass the glorified white whale as he so divinely swam.
Yet calm, enticing calm, oh, whale!
The breeze now freshened the sea began to swell.
Their vision was keener than man’s ahab could discover no sign in the sea.
This motion is peculiar to the sperm whale.
As he sullenly swam off, the boats flew to the rescue.
Far inland, nameless wails came from him, as desolate sounds from out ravines.
But this intensity of his physical prostration did but so much the more abbreviate it.
Aye, sir, for it was not darted this is it, said stubb, showing it.
Lay it before me any missing men?
One, two, three, four, five there were five oars, sir, and here are five men.
Help me, man i wish to stand.
So, so, i see him!
Going to leeward still what a leaping spout!
The eternal sap runs up in ahab’s bones again!
Set the sail out oars the helm!
Whose is the doubloon now?
And if the reply was, no, sir!
Straightway he commanded them to lift him to his perch.
What soulless thing is this that laughs before a wreck?
Groan nor laugh should be heard before a wreck.
Sing out for every spout, though he spout ten times a second!
The day was nearly done only the hem of his golden robe was rustling.
Soon, it was almost dark, but the look out men still remained unset.
Can’t see the spout now, sir too dark cried a voice from the air.
How heading when last seen?
As before, sir, straight to leeward.
He will travel slower now ’tis night.
Down royals and top gallant stun sails, mr. starbuck.
Keep her full before the wind!
The deck is thine, sir!
At day break, the three mast heads were punctually manned afresh.
Cried ahab after allowing a little space for the light to spread.
Turn up all hands and make sail!
He travels faster than i thought for the top gallant sails!
Aye, they should have been kept on her all night.
But no matter ’tis but resting for the rush.
Inferable from these statements, are many collateral subtile matters touching the chase of whales.
This ship and i are two brave fellows!
We go the gait that leaves no dust behind!
There she blows she blows!
Was now the mast head cry.
The mad fiend himself is after ye!
Blow your trump blister your lungs!
Ahab will dam off your blood, as a miller shuts his watergate upon the stream!
And stubb did but speak out for well nigh all that crew.
They were one man, not thirty.
Why sing ye not out for him, if ye see him?
Aye, breach your last to the sun, moby dick!
Cried ahab, thy hour and thy harpoon are at hand!
Down all of ye, but one man at the fore.
Mr. starbuck, the ship is thine keep away from the boats, but keep near them.
A sight more savage than the embattled teeth of sharks!
Only one thing could be done.
His ivory leg had been snapped off, leaving but one short sharp splinter.
But no bones broken, sir, i hope, said stubb with true concern.
And all splintered to pieces, stubb!
Can any lead touch yonder floor, any mast scrape yonder roof?
Up helm, then pile on the sail again, ship keepers!
Let me first help thee towards the bulwarks, sir.
How this splinter gores me now!
That the unconquerable captain in the soul should have such a craven mate!
My body, man, not thee.
Give me something for a cane there, that shivered lance will do.
Surely i have not seen him yet.
By heaven it cannot be!
The old man’s hinted thought was true.
Upon mustering the company, the parsee was not there.
Cried stubb he must have been caught in the black vomit wrench thee!
Run all of ye above, alow, cabin, forecastle find him not gone not gone!
What means that little word?
Toss over the litter there, d’ye see it?
The forged iron, men, the white whale’s no, no, no, blistered fool!
This hand did dart it!
All hands to the rigging of the boats collect the oars harpooneers!
Hoist the royals higher a pull on all the sheets!
Steady, steady for your life!
Shall we keep chasing this murderous fish till he swamps the last man?
Shall we be dragged by him to the bottom of the sea?
Shall we be towed by him to the infernal world?
Oh, oh, impiety and blasphemy to hunt him more!
Ahab is for ever ahab, man.
This whole act’s immutably decreed.
’twas rehearsed by thee and me a billion years before this ocean rolled.
I am the fates’ lieutenant i act under orders.
Believe ye, men, in the things called omens?
Then laugh aloud, and cry encore!
So with moby dick two days he’s floated tomorrow will be the third.
Aye, men, he’ll rise once more, but only to spout his last!
D’ye feel brave men, brave?
As fearless fire, cried stubb.
And as mechanical, muttered ahab.
Then as the men went forward, he muttered on the things called omens!
And yesterday i talked the same to starbuck there, concerning my broken boat.
I’ll , i’ll solve it, though!
When dusk descended, the whale was still in sight to leeward.
Cried ahab but the whale was not yet in sight.
In his infallible wake, though but follow that wake, that’s all.
Helm there steady, as thou goest, and hast been going.
What a lovely day again!
God only has that right and privilege.
Were i the wind, i’d blow no more on such a wicked, miserable world.
I’d crawl somewhere to a cave, and slink there.
And yet, ’tis a noble and heroic thing, the wind!
In every fight it has the last and bitterest blow.
Run tilting at it, and you but run through it.
Even ahab is a braver thing a nobler thing than that .
There’s a most special, a most cunning, oh, a most malicious difference!
And by the eternal poles!
The doubloon goes a begging!
Aye, aye, it must be so.
The lines the harpoons he’s towing.
Aye, aye, i have run him by last night.
Come down, all of ye, but the regular look outs!
I misdoubt me that i disobey my god in obeying him!
Stand by to sway me up!
Cried ahab, advancing to the hempen basket.
We should meet him soon.
A whole hour now passed gold beaten out to ages.
Time itself now held long breaths with keen suspense.
Forehead to forehead i meet thee, this third time, moby dick!
Brace sharper up crowd her into the wind’s eye.
He’s too far off to lower yet, mr. starbuck.
Stand over that helmsman with a top maul!
So, so he travels fast, and i must down.
The same to noah as to me.
There’s a soft shower to leeward.
They must lead somewhere to something else than common land, more palmy than the palms.
But good bye, good bye, old mast head!
Aye, tiny mosses in these warped cracks.
No such green weather stains on ahab’s head!
There’s the difference now between man’s old age and matter’s.
Aye, minus a leg, that’s all.
By heaven this dead wood has the better of my live flesh every way.
He should still go before me, my pilot and yet to be seen again?
And all night i’ve been sailing from him, wherever he did sink to.
Good bye, mast head keep a good eye upon the whale, the while i’m gone.
For the third time my soul’s ship starts upon this voyage, starbuck.
Aye, sir, thou wilt have it so.
Some ships sail from their ports, and ever afterwards are missing, starbuck!
I am old shake hands with me, man.
Their hands met their eyes fastened starbuck’s tears the glue.
Oh, my captain, my captain!
Noble heart go not go not!
See, it’s a brave man that weeps how great the agony of the persuasion then!
Cried ahab, tossing the mate’s arm from him.
In an instant the boat was pulling round close under the stern.
Cried a voice from the low cabin window there o master, my master, come back!
Thou fadest in pale glories behind me boy!
I seem to see but thy eyes grown wondrous blue.
Strangest problems of life seem clearing but clouds sweep between is my journey’s end coming?
My legs feel faint like his who has footed it all day.
Feel thy heart, beats it yet?
Stave it off move, move!
See ye my boy’s hand on the hill?
Keep thy keenest eye upon the boats mark well the whale!
He soars away with it!
Where’s the old man now?
See’st thou that sight, oh ahab!
Drive, drive in your nails, oh ye waves!
To their uttermost heads drive them in!
The harpoon dropped from his hand.
Drawing in a long lean breath aye, parsee!
But i hold thee to the last letter of thy word.
Where is the second hearse?
Away, mates, to the ship!
Ye are not other men, but my arms and my legs and so obey me.
Ahab, cried starbuck, not too late is it, even now, the third day, to desist.
Moby dick seeks thee not.
It is thou, thou, that madly seekest him!
Those teeth but give new rowlocks to your oars.
’tis the better rest, the shark’s jaw than the yielding water.
But at every bite, sir, the thin blades grow smaller and smaller!
They will last long enough!
Aye, all alive, now we near him.
Ahab staggered his hand smote his forehead.
Stretch out before me that i may yet grope my way.
Will ye not save my ship?
Oh, all ye sweet powers of air, now hug me close!
Let not starbuck die, if die he must, in a woman’s fainting fit.
Up helm, i say ye fools, the jaw!
Is this the end of all my bursting prayers?
All my life long fidelities?
Oh, ahab, ahab, lo, thy work.
He turns to meet us!
Oh, his unappeasable brow drives on towards one, whose duty tells him he cannot depart.
My god, stand by me now!
I grin at thee, thou grinning whale!
Who ever helped stubb, or kept stubb awake, but stubb’s own unwinking eye?
Look ye, sun, moon, and stars!
I call ye assassins of as good a fellow as ever spouted up his ghost.
Thou grinning whale, but there’ll be plenty of gulping soon!
Why fly ye not, o ahab!
For me, off shoes and jacket to it let stubb die in his drawers!
A most mouldy and over salted death, though cherries!
Oh, flask, for one red cherry ere we die!
I only wish that we were where they grow.
Some fell flat upon their faces.
Like dislodged trucks, the heads of the harpooneers aloft shook on their bull like necks.
Through the breach, they heard the waters pour, as mountain torrents down a flume.
Cried ahab from the boat its wood could only be american!
I turn my body from the sun.
Let me hear thy hammer.
Must ye then perish, and without me?
Am i cut off from the last fond pride of meanest shipwrecked captains?
Oh, lonely death on lonely life!
Oh, now i feel my topmost greatness lies in my topmost grief.
Sink all coffins and all hearses to one common pool!
Thus , i give up the spear!
For an instant, the tranced boat’s crew stood still then turned.
Great god, where is the ship?
Epilogue and i only am escaped alone to tell thee job.
Why then here does any one step forth?
Because one did survive the wreck.
When i reached it, it had subsided to a creamy pool.
On the second day, a sail drew near, nearer, and picked me up at last.
Html version by al haines.
Further corrections by menno de leeuw.
Do you understand this feeling?
Inspirited by this wind of promise, my daydreams become more fervent and vivid.
What may not be expected in a country of eternal light?
This expedition has been the favourite dream of my early years.
My education was neglected, yet i was passionately fond of reading.
You are well acquainted with my failure and how heavily i bore the disappointment.
Six years have passed since i resolved on my present undertaking.
I commenced by inuring my body to hardship.
And now, dear margaret, do i not deserve to accomplish some great purpose?
Oh, that some encouraging voice would answer in the affirmative!
This is the most favourable period for travelling in russia.
Ah, dear sister, how can i answer this question?
If i fail, you will see me again soon, or never.
Farewell, my dear, excellent margaret.
How slowly the time passes here, encompassed as i am by frost and snow!
Yet a second step is taken towards my enterprise.
How would such a friend repair the faults of your poor brother!
I am too ardent in execution and too impatient of difficulties.
This, briefly, is his story.
I cannot describe to you my sensations on the near prospect of my undertaking.
You will smile at my allusion, but i will disclose a secret.
There is something at work in my soul which i do not understand.
But to return to dearer considerations.
I love you very tenderly.
Remember me with affection, should you never hear from me again.
No incidents have hitherto befallen us that would make a figure in a letter.
I will be cool, persevering, and prudent.
But success shall crown my endeavours.
Why not still proceed over the untamed yet obedient element?
What can stop the determined heart and resolved will of man?
My swelling heart involuntarily pours itself out thus.
Heaven bless my beloved sister!
This appearance excited our unqualified wonder.
I profited of this time to rest for a few hours.
On perceiving me, the stranger addressed me in english, although with a foreign accent.
I replied, however, that we were on a voyage of discovery towards the northern pole.
Upon hearing this he appeared satisfied and consented to come on board.
His limbs were nearly frozen, and his body dreadfully emaciated by fatigue and suffering.
By slow degrees he recovered and ate a little soup, which restored him wonderfully.
And did the man whom you pursued travel in the same fashion?
From this time a new spirit of life animated the decaying frame of the stranger.
My affection for my guest increases every day.
He excites at once my admiration and my pity to an astonishing degree.
As i spoke, a dark gloom spread over my listener’s countenance.
I paused at length he spoke, in broken accents unhappy man!
Do you share my madness?
Have you drunk also of the intoxicating draught?
He asked me the history of my earlier years.
The tale was quickly told, but it awakened various trains of reflection.
You have hope, and the world before you, and have no cause for despair.
But i i have lost everything and cannot begin life anew.
But he was silent and presently retired to his cabin.
Will you smile at the enthusiasm i express concerning this divine wanderer?
You would not if you saw him.
Prepare to hear of occurrences which are usually deemed marvellous.
I expressed these feelings in my answer.
I wait but for one event, and then i shall repose in peace.
This promise drew from me the warmest thanks.
If i should be engaged, i will at least make notes.
As the circumstances of his marriage illustrate his character, i cannot refrain from relating them.
But when he entered, misery and despair alone welcomed him.
Several months passed in this manner.
Two years after this event caroline became his wife.
Everything was made to yield to her wishes and her convenience.
From italy they visited germany and france.
I remained for several years their only child.
For a long time i was their only care.
My mother had much desired to have a daughter, but i continued their single offspring.
Their benevolent disposition often made them enter the cottages of the poor.
Among these there was one which attracted my mother far above all the rest.
She appeared of a different stock.
She was not her child, but the daughter of a milanese nobleman.
Her mother was a german and had died on giving her birth.
They had not been long married, and their eldest child was but just born.
He became the victim of its weakness.
Whether he had died or still lingered in the dungeons of austria was not known.
His property was confiscated his child became an orphan and a beggar.
The apparition was soon explained.
They were fond of the sweet orphan.
All praises bestowed on her i received as made to a possession of my own.
We called each other familiarly by the name of cousin.
I need not say that we were strangers to any species of disunion or dispute.
The world was to me a secret which i desired to divine.
Henry clerval was the son of a merchant of geneva.
He was a boy of singular talent and fancy.
He loved enterprise, hardship, and even danger for its own sake.
He was deeply read in books of chivalry and romance.
No human being could have passed a happier childhood than myself.
My parents were possessed by the very spirit of kindness and indulgence.
Meanwhile clerval occupied himself, so to speak, with the moral relations of things.
The saintly soul of elizabeth shone like a shrine dedicated lamp in our peaceful home.
And clerval could aught ill entrench on the noble spirit of clerval?
In this house i chanced to find a volume of the works of cornelius agrippa.
My father looked carelessly at the title page of my book and said, ah!
My dear victor, do not waste your time upon this it is sad trash.
The untaught peasant beheld the elements around him and was acquainted with their practical uses.
The most learned philosopher knew little more.
But here were books, and here were men who had penetrated deeper and knew more.
I took their word for all that they averred, and i became their disciple.
Nor were these my only visions.
I remained, while the storm lasted, watching its progress with curiosity and delight.
It was not splintered by the shock, but entirely reduced to thin ribbons of wood.
I never beheld anything so utterly destroyed.
Before this i was not unacquainted with the more obvious laws of electricity.
It seemed to me as if nothing would or could ever be known.
All that had so long engaged my attention suddenly grew despicable.
It was a strong effort of the spirit of good, but it was ineffectual.
Destiny was too potent, and her immutable laws had decreed my utter and terrible destruction.
She joined the hands of elizabeth and myself.
This expectation will now be the consolation of your father.
Elizabeth, my love, you must supply my place to my younger children.
She died calmly, and her countenance expressed affection even in death.
Yet from whom has not that rude hand rent away some dear connection?
And why should i describe a sorrow which all have felt, and must feel?
I obtained from my father a respite of some weeks.
I was new to sorrow, but it did not the less alarm me.
She indeed veiled her grief and strove to act the comforter to us all.
She looked steadily on life and assumed its duties with courage and zeal.
She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us forget.
The day of my departure at length arrived.
Clerval spent the last evening with us.
Henry deeply felt the misfortune of being debarred from a liberal education.
I ardently desired the acquisition of knowledge.
Now my desires were complied with, and it would, indeed, have been folly to repent.
At length the high white steeple of the town met my eyes.
He was an uncouth man, but deeply imbued in the secrets of his science.
Have you, he said, really spent your time in studying such nonsense?
I replied in the affirmative.
You have burdened your memory with exploded systems and useless names.
My dear sir, you must begin your studies entirely anew.
Besides, i had a contempt for the uses of modern natural philosophy.
I was required to exchange chimeras of boundless grandeur for realities of little worth.
This professor was very unlike his colleague.
I closed not my eyes that night.
By degrees, after the morning’s dawn, sleep came.
I awoke, and my yesternight’s thoughts were as a dream.
On the same day i paid m. waldman a visit.
I requested his advice concerning the books i ought to procure.
Thus ended a day memorable to me it decided my future destiny.
In m. waldman i found a true friend.
As i applied so closely, it may be easily conceived that my progress was rapid.
None but those who have experienced them can conceive of the enticements of science.
Whence, i often asked myself, did the principle of life proceed?
To examine the causes of life, we must first have recourse to death.
Remember, i am not recording the vision of a madman.
It was with these feelings that i began the creation of a human being.
These thoughts supported my spirits, while i pursued my undertaking with unremitting ardour.
My cheek had grown pale with study, and my person had become emaciated with confinement.
The summer months passed while i was thus engaged, heart and soul, in one pursuit.
I do not think that the pursuit of knowledge is an exception to this rule.
His limbs were in proportion, and i had selected his features as beautiful.
The different accidents of life are not so changeable as the feelings of human nature.
For this i had deprived myself of rest and health.
His jaws opened, and he muttered some inarticulate sounds, while a grin wrinkled his cheeks.
No mortal could support the horror of that countenance.
A mummy again endued with animation could not be so hideous as that wretch.
I passed the night wretchedly.
My dear frankenstein, exclaimed he, how glad i am to see you!
How fortunate that you should be here at the very moment of my alighting!
By the by, i mean to lecture you a little upon their account myself.
I walked with a quick pace, and we soon arrived at my college.
My hand was already on the lock of the door before i recollected myself.
I then paused, and a cold shivering came over me.
My dear victor, cried he, what, for god’s sake, is the matter?
Do not laugh in that manner.
What is the cause of all this?
What must have been his feelings?
A meeting, which he anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness.
This was the commencement of a nervous fever which confined me for several months.
During all that time henry was my only nurse.
It was a divine spring, and the season contributed greatly to my convalescence.
Dearest clerval, exclaimed i, how kind, how very good you are to me.
How shall i ever repay you?
Could he allude to an object on whom i dared not even think?
They hardly know how ill you have been and are uneasy at your long silence.
Is that all, my dear henry?
Yet that is over now clerval writes that indeed you are getting better.
I eagerly hope that you will confirm this intelligence soon in your own handwriting.
Get well and return to us.
You will find a happy, cheerful home and friends who love you dearly.
How pleased you would be to remark the improvement of our ernest!
He is now sixteen and full of activity and spirit.
Since you left us, but one change has taken place in our little household.
Do you remember on what occasion justine moritz entered our family?
Probably you do not i will relate her history, therefore in a few words.
Poor justine was very ill but other trials were reserved for her.
Nor was her residence at her mother’s house of a nature to restore her gaiety.
The poor woman was very vacillating in her repentance.
Justine has just returned to us and i assure you i love her tenderly.
When he smiles, two little dimples appear on each cheek, which are rosy with health.
Her ugly sister, manon, married m. duvillard, the rich banker, last autumn.
Write, dearest victor, one line one word will be a blessing to us.
My cousin take care of yourself and, i entreat you, write!
In another fortnight i was able to leave my chamber.
Henry saw this, and had removed all my apparatus from my view.
But these cares of clerval were made of no avail when i visited the professors.
He meant to please, and he tormented me.
I writhed under his words, yet dared not exhibit the pain i felt.
I thanked my friend from my heart, but i did not speak.
Cried he why, m. clerval, i assure you he has outstript us all.
Ay, stare if you please but it is nevertheless true.
I read merely to understand their meaning, and they well repaid my labours.
How different from the manly and heroical poetry of greece and rome!
When happy, inanimate nature had the power of bestowing on me the most delightful sensations.
A serene sky and verdant fields filled me with ecstasy.
But that would be a cruel kindness, and i dare not do it.
And how, victor, can i relate our misfortune?
Last thursday , i, my niece, and your two brothers, went to walk in plainpalais.
The evening was warm and serene, and we prolonged our walk farther than usual.
We accordingly rested on a seat until they should return.
She was very earnest to see the corpse.
I have murdered my darling child!’ she fainted, and was restored with extreme difficulty.
When she again lived, it was only to weep and sigh.
Come, dearest victor you alone can console elizabeth.
Your affectionate and afflicted father, alphonse frankenstein.
I threw the letter on the table, and covered my face with my hands.
My dear friend, what has happened?
I can offer you no consolation, my friend, said he your disaster is irreparable.
To go instantly to geneva come with me, henry, to order the horses.
Said he, dear lovely child, he now sleeps with his angel mother!
To die so miserably to feel the murderer’s grasp!
How much more a murdered that could destroy radiant innocence!
One only consolation have we his friends mourn and weep, but he is at rest.
The pang is over, his sufferings are at an end for ever.
A sod covers his gentle form, and he knows no pain.
My journey was very melancholy.
I could hardly sustain the multitude of feelings that crowded into my mind.
How altered every thing might be during that time!
I remained two days at lausanne, in this painful state of mind.
I wept like a child.
How do you welcome your wanderer?
Your summits are clear the sky and lake are blue and placid.
Is this to prognosticate peace, or to mock at my unhappiness?
My country, my beloved country!
Yet, as i drew nearer home, grief and fear again overcame me.
This is thy funeral, this thy dirge!
Could he be the murderer of my brother?
The figure passed me quickly, and i lost it in the gloom.
Nothing in human shape could have destroyed the fair child.
I could not doubt it.
The mere presence of the idea was an irresistible proof of the fact.
He soon reached the summit, and disappeared.
Day dawned and i directed my steps towards the town.
The gates were open, and i hastened to my father’s house.
But i paused when i reflected on the story that i had to tell.
And then of what use would be pursuit?
Who could arrest a creature capable of scaling the overhanging sides of mont salêve?
These reflections determined me, and i resolved to remain silent.
It was about five in the morning when i entered my father’s house.
He still remained to me.
I gazed on the picture of my mother, which stood over the mantel piece.
He was our darling and our pride!
But since the murderer has been discovered the murderer discovered!
Who could attempt to pursue him?
I saw him too he was free last night!
Poor, poor girl, is she the accused?
But it is wrongfully every one knows that no one believes it, surely, ernest?
But she will be tried today, and you will then hear all.
Justine, poor, good justine, is innocent.
At that instant my father entered.
Victor says that he knows who was the murderer of poor william.
My dear father, you are mistaken justine is innocent.
If she is, god forbid that she should suffer as guilty.
We were soon joined by elizabeth.
She welcomed me with the greatest affection.
Your arrival, my dear cousin, said she, fills me with hope.
You perhaps will find some means to justify my poor guiltless justine.
Who is safe, if she be convicted of crime?
I rely on her innocence as certainly as i do upon my own.
If she is condemned, i never shall know joy more.
How kind and generous you are!
Dearest niece, said my father, dry your tears.
During the whole of this wretched mockery of justice i suffered living torture.
The appearance of justine was calm.
Justine was called on for her defence.
As the trial had proceeded, her countenance had altered.
Surprise, horror, and misery were strongly expressed.
God knows, she said, how entirely i am innocent.
Concerning the picture she could give no account.
But here also i am checked.
Did the murderer place it there?
I am well acquainted with the accused.
She herself wept as elizabeth spoke, but she did not answer.
My own agitation and anguish was extreme during the whole trial.
I believed in her innocence i knew it.
I passed a night of unmingled wretchedness.
In the morning i went to the court my lips and throat were parched.
The ballots had been thrown they were all black, and justine was condemned.
I cannot pretend to describe what i then felt.
The person to whom i addressed myself added that justine had already confessed her guilt.
This was strange and unexpected intelligence what could it mean?
Had my eyes deceived me?
I hastened to return home, and elizabeth eagerly demanded the result.
How shall i ever again believe in human goodness?
The idea of this visit was torture to me, yet i could not refuse.
Why did you rob me of my last consolation?
And do you also believe that i am so very, very wicked?
Her voice was suffocated with sobs.
Rise, my poor girl, said elizabeth why do you kneel, if you are innocent?
I did confess, but i confessed a lie.
The god of heaven forgive me!
He threatened excommunication and hell fire in my last moments if i continued obdurate.
Forgive me for having for one moment distrusted you.
But do not mourn, dear girl.
I will proclaim, i will prove your innocence.
I will melt the stony hearts of your enemies by my tears and prayers.
You, my playfellow, my companion, my sister, perish on the scaffold!
I never could survive so horrible a misfortune.
Justine shook her head mournfully.
I do not fear to die, she said that pang is past.
God raises my weakness and gives me courage to endure the worst.
Learn from me, dear lady, to submit in patience to the will of heaven!
Who dared talk of that?
How sweet is the affection of others to such a wretch as i am!
Thus the poor sufferer tried to comfort others and herself.
She indeed gained the resignation she desired.
Justine assumed an air of cheerfulness, while she with difficulty repressed her bitter tears.
Live, and be happy, and make others so.
And on the morrow justine died.
My passionate and indignant appeals were lost upon them.
She perished on the scaffold as a murderess!
This also was my doing!
Ye weep, unhappy ones, but these are not your last tears!
Justine died, she rested, and i was alive.
Yet my heart overflowed with kindness and the love of virtue.
Do you think, victor, said he, that i do not suffer also?
About this time we retired to our house at belrive.
This change was particularly agreeable to me.
But that could not be.
There was always scope for fear so long as anything i loved remained behind.
My abhorrence of this fiend cannot be conceived.
Our house was the house of mourning.
My father’s health was deeply shaken by the horror of the recent events.
Yet i am certainly unjust.
I listened to this discourse with the extremest agony.
I, not in deed, but in effect, was the true murderer.
Dear victor, banish these dark passions.
Remember the friends around you, who centre all their hopes in you.
Have we lost the power of rendering you happy?
I was encompassed by a cloud which no beneficial influence could penetrate.
My wanderings were directed towards the valley of chamounix.
I had visited it frequently during my boyhood.
I performed the first part of my journey on horseback.
Still, as i ascended higher, the valley assumed a more magnificent and astonishing character.
Soon after, i entered the valley of chamounix.
A tingling long lost sense of pleasure often came across me during this journey.
The very winds whispered in soothing accents, and maternal nature bade me weep no more.
At length i arrived at the village of chamounix.
Where had they fled when the next morning i awoke?
All of soul inspiriting fled with sleep, and dark melancholy clouded every thought.
Still i would penetrate their misty veil and seek them in their cloudy retreats.
What were rain and storm to me?
It is a scene terrifically desolate.
We rest a dream has power to poison sleep.
We rise one wand’ring thought pollutes the day.
Man’s yesterday may ne’er be like his morrow nought may endure but mutability!
It was nearly noon when i arrived at the top of the ascent.
For some time i sat upon the rock that overlooks the sea of ice.
A mist covered both that and the surrounding mountains.
Presently a breeze dissipated the cloud, and i descended upon the glacier.
The opposite mountain is a bare perpendicular rock.
I remained in a recess of the rock, gazing on this wonderful and stupendous scene.
Their icy and glittering peaks shone in the sunlight over the clouds.
Devil, i exclaimed, do you dare approach me?
Or rather, stay, that i may trample you to dust!
I expected this reception, said the dæmon.
You purpose to kill me.
How dare you sport thus with life?
The tortures of hell are too mild a vengeance for thy crimes.
He easily eluded me and said, be calm!
Have i not suffered enough, that you seek to increase my misery?
But i will not be tempted to set myself in opposition to thee.
Everywhere i see bliss, from which i alone am irrevocably excluded.
I was benevolent and good misery made me a fiend.
Make me happy, and i shall again be virtuous.
I will not hear you.
There can be no community between you and me we are enemies.
Begone, or let us try our strength in a fight, in which one must fall.
How can i move thee?
They spurn and hate me.
The desert mountains and dreary glaciers are my refuge.
These bleak skies i hail, for they are kinder to me than your fellow beings.
Shall i not then hate them who abhor me?
I will keep no terms with my enemies.
I am miserable, and they shall share my wretchedness.
Let your compassion be moved, and do not disdain me.
Oh, praise the eternal justice of man!
Cursed be the day, abhorred devil, in which you first saw light!
Cursed be the hands that formed you!
You have made me wretched beyond expression.
Relieve me from the sight of your detested form.
Still thou canst listen to me and grant me thy compassion.
By the virtues that i once possessed, i demand this from you.
As he said this he led the way across the ice i followed.
I was partly urged by curiosity, and compassion confirmed my resolution.
These motives urged me to comply with his demand.
We crossed the ice, therefore, and ascended the opposite rock.
I slaked my thirst at the brook, and then lying down, was overcome by sleep.
Soon a gentle light stole over the heavens and gave me a sensation of pleasure.
I started up and beheld a radiant form rise from among the trees.
I gazed with a kind of wonder.
No distinct ideas occupied my mind all was confused.
Sometimes i tried to imitate the pleasant songs of the birds but was unable.
How strange, i thought, that the same cause should produce such opposite effects!
I quickly collected some branches, but they were wet and would not burn.
I was pained at this and sat still watching the operation of the fire.
The wet wood which i had placed near the heat dried and itself became inflamed.
It was morning when i awoke, and my first care was to visit the fire.
I uncovered it, and a gentle breeze quickly fanned it into a flame.
I passed three days in these rambles and at length discovered the open country.
This was a new sight to me, and i examined the structure with great curiosity.
Finding the door open, i entered.
Then, overcome by fatigue, i lay down among some straw and fell asleep.
How miraculous did this appear!
The huts, the neater cottages, and stately houses engaged my admiration by turns.
She followed, and they disappeared.
Soon after this the young man returned, bearing on his shoulders a load of wood.
The meal was quickly dispatched.
Nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between these two excellent creatures.
I thought of the occurrences of the day.
The cottagers arose the next morning before the sun.
This day was passed in the same routine as that which preceded it.
They were not entirely happy.
The young man and his companion often went apart and appeared to weep.
I saw no cause for their unhappiness, but i was deeply affected by it.
Yet why were these gentle beings unhappy?
What did their tears imply?
Did they really express pain?
This trait of kindness moved me sensibly.
I discovered also another means through which i was enabled to assist their labours.
By degrees i made a discovery of still greater moment.
This was indeed a godlike science, and i ardently desired to become acquainted with it.
But i was baffled in every attempt i made for this purpose.
I learned also the names of the cottagers themselves.
The girl was called sister or agatha, and the youth felix, brother, or son .
I spent the winter in this manner.
It was not thus with felix.
I could mention innumerable instances which, although slight, marked the dispositions of these amiable cottagers.
I did not yet entirely know the fatal effects of this miserable deformity.
My mode of life in my hovel was uniform.
The pleasant showers and genial warmth of spring greatly altered the aspect of the earth.
Fit habitation for gods, which, so short a time before, was bleak, damp, and unwholesome.
Spring advanced rapidly the weather became fine and the skies cloudless.
It was a lady on horseback, accompanied by a country man as a guide.
The lady was dressed in a dark suit and covered with a thick black veil.
Her voice was musical but unlike that of either of my friends.
She did not appear to understand him, but smiled.
He assisted her to dismount, and dismissing her guide, conducted her into the cottage.
Felix seemed peculiarly happy and with smiles of delight welcomed his arabian.
As night came on, agatha and the arabian retired early.
When she had finished, she gave the guitar to agatha, who at first declined it.
The book from which felix instructed safie was volney’s ruins of empires .
These wonderful narrations inspired me with strange feelings.
Every conversation of the cottagers now opened new wonders to me.
The words induced me to turn towards myself.
When i looked around i saw and heard of none like me.
Of what a strange nature is knowledge!
Other lessons were impressed upon me even more deeply.
But where were my friends and relations?
From my earliest remembrance i had been as i then was in height and proportion.
The question again recurred, to be answered only with groans.
The name of the old man was de lacey.
The father of safie had been the cause of their ruin.
He was tried and condemned to death.
Felix had procured passports in the name of his father, sister, and himself.
His plans were facilitated by the news which arrived from paris.
The news reached felix and roused him from his dream of pleasure.
This idea was torture to him.
They found a miserable asylum in the cottage in germany, where i discovered them.
The arrival of the arabian now infused new life into his soul.
She hesitated some time, but at length she formed her determination.
She fell, however, into good hands.
I eagerly seized the prize and returned with it to my hovel.
I can hardly describe to you the effect of these books.
The disquisitions upon death and suicide were calculated to fill me with wonder.
As i read, however, i applied much personally to my own feelings and condition.
The path of my departure was free,’ and there was none to lament my annihilation.
My person was hideous and my stature gigantic.
These questions continually recurred, but i was unable to solve them.
This book had a far different effect upon me from the sorrows of werter .
Many things i read surpassed my understanding and experience.
But i was perfectly unacquainted with towns and large assemblages of men.
I read of men concerned in public affairs, governing or massacring their species.
But paradise lost excited different and far deeper emotions.
I often referred the several situations, as their similarity struck me, to my own.
Another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings.
It was your journal of the four months that preceded my creation.
You doubtless recollect these papers.
I sickened as i read.
Hateful day when i received life!’ i exclaimed in agony.
Could they turn from their door one, however monstrous, who solicited their compassion and friendship?
Several changes, in the meantime, took place in the cottage.
Increase of knowledge only discovered to me more clearly what a wretched outcast i was.
I remembered adam’s supplication to his creator.
He had abandoned me, and in the bitterness of my heart i cursed him.
Their happiness was not decreased by the absence of summer.
I dared not think that they would turn them from me with disdain and horror.
The poor that stopped at their door were never driven away.
The servants were gone to a neighbouring fair.
Who is there?’ said the old man.
But let us change the subject.
I thank you and accept your generous offer.
At that moment i heard the steps of my younger protectors.
You and your family are the friends whom i seek.
Who can describe their horror and consternation on beholding me?
Agatha fainted, and safie, unable to attend to her friend, rushed out of the cottage.
I could have torn him limb from limb, as the lion rends the antelope.
But my heart sank within me as with bitter sickness, and i refrained.
What a miserable night i passed!
I had certainly acted imprudently.
All there was at peace.
I trembled violently, apprehending some dreadful misfortune.
My wife and my sister will never recover from their horror.
I entreat you not to reason with me any more.
I never saw any of the family of de lacey more.
And now, with the world before me, whither should i bend my steps?
At length the thought of you crossed my mind.
But how was i to direct myself?
My travels were long and the sufferings i endured intense.
I travelled only at night, fearful of encountering the visage of a human being.
How often did i imprecate curses on the cause of my being!
Snow fell, and the waters were hardened, but i rested not.
I felt emotions of gentleness and pleasure, that had long appeared dead, revive within me.
I sank to the ground, and my injurer, with increased swiftness, escaped into the wood.
This was then the reward of my benevolence!
Inflamed by pain, i vowed eternal hatred and vengeance to all mankind.
But the agony of my wound overcame me my pulses paused, and i fainted.
After some weeks my wound healed, and i continued my journey.
I do not intend to hurt you listen to me.’ he struggled violently.
Let me go,’ he cried monster!
You wish to eat me and tear me to pieces.
My papa is a syndic he is m. frankenstein he will punish you.
You dare not keep me.’ frankenstein!
I took it it was a portrait of a most lovely woman.
In spite of my malignity, it softened and attracted me.
Can you wonder that such thoughts transported me with rage?
Should she indeed awake, and see me, and curse me, and denounce the murderer?
Thus would she assuredly act if her darkened eyes opened and she beheld me.
The crime had its source in her be hers the punishment!
She moved again, and i fled.
We may not part until you have promised to comply with my requisition.
My companion must be of the same species and have the same defects.
This being you must create.
Shall i create another like yourself, whose joint wickedness might desolate the world.
I have answered you you may torture me, but i will never consent.
I am malicious because i am miserable.
Am i not shunned and hated by all mankind?
Shall i respect man when he condemns me?
But that cannot be the human senses are insurmountable barriers to our union.
Yet mine shall not be the submission of abject slavery.
But i now indulge in dreams of bliss that cannot be realised.
My creator, make me happy let me feel gratitude towards you for one benefit!
This may not be cease to argue the point, for i cannot consent.
How inconstant are your feelings!
My evil passions will have fled, for i shall meet with sympathy!
His words had a strange effect upon me.
I must not be trifled with, and i demand an answer.
Saying this, he suddenly quitted me, fearful, perhaps, of any change in my sentiments.
I wept bitterly, and clasping my hands in agony, i exclaimed, oh!
Thus i returned home, and entering the house, presented myself to the family.
At these moments i took refuge in the most perfect solitude.
And yet you are still unhappy and still avoid our society.
My dear father, reassure yourself.
I love my cousin tenderly and sincerely.
I never saw any woman who excited, as elizabeth does, my warmest admiration and affection.
My future hopes and prospects are entirely bound up in the expectation of our union.
Tell me, therefore, whether you object to an immediate solemnisation of the marriage.
Interpret my words with candour and answer me, i conjure you, with confidence and sincerity.
I must absent myself from all i loved while thus employed.
My promise fulfilled, the monster would depart for ever.
These feelings dictated my answer to my father.
One paternal kind precaution he had taken to ensure my having a companion.
Nay, henry might stand between me and the intrusion of my foe.
My father’s age rendered him extremely averse to delay.
It was in the latter end of september that i again quitted my native country.
Alas, how great was the contrast between us!
This is what it is to live, he cried now i enjoy existence!
But you, my dear frankenstein, wherefore are you desponding and sorrowful!
I, a miserable wretch, haunted by a curse that shut up every avenue to enjoyment.
During this voyage we passed many willowy islands and saw several beautiful towns.
The course of the rhine below mainz becomes much more picturesque.
This part of the rhine, indeed, presents a singularly variegated landscape.
And if these were my sensations, who can describe those of henry?
He was a being formed in the very poetry of nature.
His wild and enthusiastic imagination was chastened by the sensibility of his heart.
But even human sympathies were not sufficient to satisfy his eager mind.
And where does he now exist?
Is this gentle and lovely being lost for ever?
Does it now only exist in my memory?
I will proceed with my tale.
But busy, uninteresting, joyous faces brought back despair to my heart.
He was also pursuing an object he had long had in view.
In britain only could he further the execution of his plan.
I often refused to accompany him, alleging another engagement, that i might remain alone.
We had arrived in england at the beginning of october, and it was now february.
From thence we proceeded to oxford.
It was here that charles i. had collected his forces.
I was formed for peaceful happiness.
Our little voyages of discovery were often prolonged by the successive objects that presented themselves.
From derby, still journeying northwards, we passed two months in cumberland and westmorland.
I could now almost fancy myself among the swiss mountains.
Here also we made some acquaintances, who almost contrived to cheat me into happiness.
For my own part i was not sorry.
He might remain in switzerland and wreak his vengeance on my relatives.
But i was impatient to arrive at the termination of my journey.
Do you, said i, enjoy yourself, and let this be our rendezvous.
Henry wished to dissuade me, but seeing me bent on this plan, ceased to remonstrate.
He entreated me to write often.
It was a monotonous yet ever changing scene.
I thought of switzerland it was far different from this desolate and appalling landscape.
Its hills are covered with vines, and its cottages are scattered thickly in the plains.
It was, indeed, a filthy process in which i was engaged.
Every moment i feared to meet my persecutor.
In the mean time i worked on, and my labour was already considerably advanced.
Had i right, for my own benefit, to inflict this curse upon everlasting generations?
As i looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost extent of malice and treachery.
Do you dare to break your promise?
I have endured incalculable fatigue, and cold, and hunger do you dare destroy my hopes?
Slave, i before reasoned with you, but you have proved yourself unworthy of my condescension.
You are my creator, but i am your master obey!
The hour of my irresolution is past, and the period of your power is arrived.
I am firm, and your words will only exasperate my rage.
I had feelings of affection, and they were requited by detestation and scorn.
You may hate, but beware!
Are you to be happy while i grovel in the intensity of my wretchedness?
Beware, for i am fearless and therefore powerful.
Man, you shall repent of the injuries you inflict.
Devil, cease and do not poison the air with these sounds of malice.
Leave me i am inexorable.
I go but remember, i shall be with you on your wedding night.
I started forward and exclaimed, villain!
Before you sign my death warrant, be sure that you are yourself safe.
I would have seized him, but he eluded me and quitted the house with precipitation.
All was again silent, but his words rang in my ears.
Why had i not followed him and closed with him in mortal strife?
I shuddered to think who might be the next victim sacrificed to his insatiate revenge.
That, then, was the period fixed for the fulfilment of my destiny.
In that hour i should die and at once satisfy and extinguish his malice.
I paused to collect myself and then entered the chamber.
The wind was high, and the waves continually threatened the safety of my little skiff.
Thus situated, my only resource was to drive before the wind.
I confess that i felt a few sensations of terror.
Fiend, i exclaimed, your task is already fulfilled!
Fortunately i had money with me.
You will know that soon enough, replied a man with a hoarse voice.
Why do you answer me so roughly?
Surely it is not the custom of englishmen to receive strangers so inhospitably.
While this strange dialogue continued, i perceived the crowd rapidly increase.
I inquired the way to the inn, but no one replied.
Why am i to give an account of myself?
Is not this a free country?
Ay, sir, free enough for honest folks.
This answer startled me, but i presently recovered myself.
It appeared to be a handsome young man, about five and twenty years of age.
I was accordingly conducted, by the magistrate and several other persons, to the inn.
I entered the room where the corpse lay and was led up to the coffin.
How can i describe my sensations on beholding it?
A fever succeeded to this.
Why did i not die?
This sound disturbed an old woman who was sleeping in a chair beside me.
Are you better now, sir?
I put my hand before my eyes, and cried out in agony, oh!
I cannot see him for god’s sake, do not let him enter!
Mr. kirwin regarded me with a troubled countenance.
Cried i, while every feature and every muscle was relaxed from anguish to pleasure.
Is my father indeed come?
How kind, how very kind!
But where is he, why does he not hasten to me?
What a place is this that you inhabit, my son!
Said he, looking mournfully at the barred windows and wretched appearance of the room.
You travelled to seek happiness, but a fatality seems to pursue you.
The image of clerval was for ever before me, ghastly and murdered.
Why did they preserve so miserable and detested a life?
The season of the assizes approached.
Mr. kirwin charged himself with every care of collecting witnesses and arranging my defence.
My father tried to awaken in me the feelings of affection.
I was a mere skeleton, and fever night and day preyed upon my wasted frame.
We landed, and proceeded to paris.
He wished me to seek amusement in society.
I abhorred the face of man.
But i felt that i had no right to share their intercourse.
My father, said i, how little do you know me.
William, justine, and henry they all died by my hands.
I avoided explanation and maintained a continual silence concerning the wretch i had created.
Yet, still, words like those i have recorded would burst uncontrollably from me.
My dear son, i entreat you never to make such an assertion again.
I am the assassin of those most innocent victims they died by my machinations.
My poor cousin, how much you must have suffered!
I expect to see you looking even more ill than when you quitted geneva.
You may possibly say, what can elizabeth have to explain?
If you really say this, my questions are answered and all my doubts satisfied.
But this is false reasoning.
On that night he had determined to consummate his crimes by my death.
If he were vanquished, i should be a free man.
Yet i would die to make her happy.
In this state of mind i wrote to elizabeth.
My letter was calm and affectionate.
But until then, i conjure you, do not mention or allude to it.
This i most earnestly entreat, and i know you will comply.
In about a week after the arrival of elizabeth’s letter we returned to geneva.
I saw a change in her also.
The tranquillity which i now enjoyed did not endure.
She wept with me and for me.
When reason returned, she would remonstrate and endeavour to inspire me with resignation.
Soon after my arrival my father spoke of my immediate marriage with elizabeth.
Have you, then, some other attachment?
I love elizabeth and look forward to our union with delight.
My dear victor, do not speak thus.
Such were the lessons of my father.
A small possession on the shores of como belonged to her.
Elizabeth seemed happy my tranquil demeanour contributed greatly to calm her mind.
The day was fair, the wind favourable all smiled on our nuptial embarkation.
I took the hand of elizabeth.
You are sorrowful, my love.
How happy and serene all nature appears!
Thus elizabeth endeavoured to divert her thoughts and mine from all reflection upon melancholy subjects.
Suddenly a heavy storm of rain descended.
What is it you fear?
It came from the room into which elizabeth had retired.
Why did i not then expire!
Could i behold this and live?
Life is obstinate and clings closest where it is most hated.
For a moment only did i lose recollection i fell senseless on the ground.
The report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room.
I was bewildered, in a cloud of wonder and horror.
This idea made me shudder and recalled me to action.
I started up and resolved to return to geneva with all possible speed.
However, it was hardly morning, and i might reasonably hope to arrive by night.
Tears streamed from my eyes.
Nothing is so painful to the human mind as a great and sudden change.
But why should i dwell upon the incidents that followed this last overwhelming event?
Know that, one by one, my friends were snatched away i was left desolate.
I see him now, excellent and venerable old man!
What then became of me?
The magistrate listened to me with attention and kindness.
I thank you, replied i listen, therefore, to the deposition that i have to make.
This address caused a considerable change in the physiognomy of my own auditor.
As i spoke, rage sparkled in my eyes the magistrate was intimidated.
You are mistaken, said he.
That cannot be but all that i can say will be of little avail.
Man, i cried, how ignorant art thou in thy pride of wisdom!
Cease you know not what it is you say.
And now my wanderings began which are to cease but with life.
But revenge kept me alive i dared not die and leave my adversary in being.
I entered it and approached the tomb which marked their graves.
I was answered through the stillness of night by a loud and fiendish laugh.
You have determined to live, and i am satisfied.
I pursued him, and for many months this has been my task.
Guided by a slight clue, i followed the windings of the rhone, but vainly.
I took my passage in the same ship, but he escaped, i know not how.
Deprived of this respite, i should have sunk under my hardships.
What agonising fondness did i feel for them!
What his feelings were whom i pursued i cannot know.
The triumph of my enemy increased with the difficulty of my labours.
One inscription that he left was in these words prepare!
How unlike it was to the blue seasons of the south!
I inquired of the inhabitants concerning the fiend and gained accurate information.
On hearing this information i suffered a temporary access of despair.
But again the frost came and made the paths of the sea secure.
With what a burning gush did hope revisit my heart!
I pressed on, but in vain.
But your direction was northwards.
No i am not so selfish.
His soul is as hellish as his form, full of treachery and fiend like malice.
I will hover near and direct the steel aright.
Such a monster has, then, really existence!
I cannot doubt it, yet i am lost in surprise and admiration.
Are you mad, my friend?
Or whither does your senseless curiosity lead you?
Would you also create for yourself and the world a demoniacal enemy?
Learn my miseries and do not seek to increase your own.
Our conversations are not always confined to his own history and misfortunes.
He seems to feel his own worth and the greatness of his fall.
When younger, said he, i believed myself destined for some great enterprise.
Even now i cannot recollect without passion my reveries while the work was incomplete.
Must i then lose this admirable being?
I would reconcile him to life, but he repulses the idea.
Can any man be to me as clerval was, or any woman another elizabeth?
If we are lost, my mad schemes are the cause.
And what, margaret, will be the state of your mind?
You will not hear of my destruction, and you will anxiously await my return.
But you have a husband and lovely children you may be happy.
Heaven bless you and make you so!
My unfortunate guest regards me with the tenderest compassion.
I mentioned in my last letter the fears i entertained of a mutiny.
They entered, and their leader addressed me.
Yet could i, in justice, or even in possibility, refuse this demand?
Turning towards the men, he said, what do you mean?
What do you demand of your captain?
Are you, then, so easily turned from your design?
Did you not call this a glorious expedition?
And wherefore was it glorious?
For this was it a glorious, for this was it an honourable undertaking.
Be men, or be more than men.
Be steady to your purposes and firm as a rock.
Do not return to your families with the stigma of disgrace marked on your brows.
They looked at one another and were unable to reply.
The die is cast i have consented to return if we are not destroyed.
Thus are my hopes blasted by cowardice and indecision i come back ignorant and disappointed.
It requires more philosophy than i possess to bear this injustice with patience.
It is past i am returning to england.
I have lost my hopes of utility and glory i have lost my friend.
Frankenstein, who was dozing, awoke and asked the cause of the tumult.
They shout, i said, because they will soon return to england.
Do you, then, really return?
Yes i cannot withstand their demands.
I cannot lead them unwillingly to danger, and i must return.
Do so, if you will but i will not.
At length he opened his eyes he breathed with difficulty and was unable to speak.
The surgeon gave him a composing draught and ordered us to leave him undisturbed.
His sentence was pronounced, and i could only grieve and be patient.
This was my duty, but there was another still paramount to that.
Miserable himself that he may render no other wretched, he ought to die.
The task of his destruction was mine, but i have failed.
The forms of the beloved dead flit before me, and i hasten to their arms.
Yet why do i say this?
I have myself been blasted in these hopes, yet another may succeed.
Margaret, what comment can i make on the untimely extinction of this glorious spirit?
What can i say that will enable you to understand the depth of my sorrow?
All that i should express would be inadequate and feeble.
My tears flow my mind is overshadowed by a cloud of disappointment.
But i journey towards england, and i may there find consolation.
What do these sounds portend?
It is midnight the breeze blows fairly, and the watch on deck scarcely stir.
I must arise and examine.
What a scene has just taken place!
I am yet dizzy with the remembrance of it.
I entered the cabin where lay the remains of my ill fated and admirable friend.
I called on him to stay.
That is also my victim!
Generous and self devoted being!
What does it avail that i now ask thee to pardon me?
I, who irretrievably destroyed thee by destroying all thou lovedst.
He is cold, he cannot answer me.
I attempted to speak, but the words died away on my lips.
The monster continued to utter wild and incoherent self reproaches.
Your repentance, i said, is now superfluous.
Do you think that i was then dead to agony and remorse?
A frightful selfishness hurried me on, while my heart was poisoned with remorse.
Think you that the groans of clerval were music to my ears?
After the murder of clerval i returned to switzerland, heart broken and overcome.
I pitied frankenstein my pity amounted to horror i abhorred myself.
I recollected my threat and resolved that it should be accomplished.
Nay, then i was not miserable.
Evil thenceforth became my good.
The completion of my demoniacal design became an insatiable passion.
And now it is ended there is my last victim!
Oh, it is not thus not thus, interrupted the being.
Yet i seek not a fellow feeling in my misery.
No sympathy may i ever find.
Once my fancy was soothed with dreams of virtue, of fame, and of enjoyment.
I was nourished with high thoughts of honour and devotion.
But now crime has degraded me beneath the meanest animal.
No guilt, no mischief, no malignity, no misery, can be found comparable to mine.
But it is even so the fallen angel becomes a malignant devil.
For while i destroyed his hopes, i did not satisfy my own desires.
Was there no injustice in this?
Am i to be thought the only criminal, when all humankind sinned against me?
Why do you not hate felix, who drove his friend from his door with contumely?
Nay, these are virtuous and immaculate beings!
Even now my blood boils at the recollection of this injustice.
But it is true that i am a wretch.
There he lies, white and cold in death.
You hate me, but your abhorrence cannot equal that with which i regard myself.
Fear not that i shall be the instrument of future mischief.
My work is nearly complete.
Do not think that i shall be slow to perform this sacrifice.
Soon these burning miseries will be extinct.
Updated editions will replace the previous one the old editions will be renamed.
The project gutenberg ebook of the souls of black folk, by w. e. b.
Du bois herein is written the forethought i.
Of our spiritual strivings ii.
Of the dawn of freedom iii.
Of mr. booker t. washington and others iv.
Of the meaning of progress v. of the wings of atalanta vi.
Of the training of black men vii.
Of the black belt viii.
Of the quest of the golden fleece ix.
Of the sons of master and man x.
Of the faith of the fathers xi.
Of the passing of the first born xii.
Of the coming of john xiv.
Some of these thoughts of mine have seen the light before in other guise.
All night long the water is crying to me.
All, nevertheless, flutter round it.
To the real question, how does it feel to be a problem?
I answer seldom a word.
I remember well when the shadow swept across me.
In this merging he wishes neither of the older selves to be lost.
And yet it is not weakness, it is the contradiction of double aims.
At last it came, suddenly, fearfully, like a dream.
For god has bought your liberty!
As the time flew, however, he began to grasp a new idea.
Had not votes made war and emancipated millions?
Had not votes enfranchised the freedmen?
Was anything impossible to a power that had done all this?
A million black men started with renewed zeal to vote themselves into the kingdom.
Nor was his burden all poverty and ignorance.
To which the negro cries amen!
Whisperings and portents came home upon the four winds lo!
Are they all wrong, all false?
To be really true, all these ideals must be melted and welded into one.
Or her coarse and cruel wit with loving jovial good humor?
Or her vulgar music with the soul of the sorrow songs?
Two methods of treating these newcomers seemed equally logical to opposite sorts of minds.
Thus the barriers were levelled and the deed was done.
Are we to find food and shelter for women and children?
In these and other ways were camp life and the new liberty demoralizing the freedmen.
In south carolina was general saxton, with his deep interest in black folk.
So read the celebrated field order number fifteen.
This bill passed, but too late for action by the house.
The bill was conservative, giving the new department general superintendence of all freedmen.
Nevertheless, the senate defeated the bill, and a new conference committee was appointed.
This last compromise was a hasty bit of legislation, vague and uncertain in outline.
It was a tremendous undertaking.
He was a maine man, then only thirty five years of age.
Forthwith nine assistant commissioners were appointed.
First, there were the abandoned lands of the south.
Rich and poor they were, serious and curious.
They did their work well.
In that first year they taught one hundred thousand souls, and more.
An institution such as that was well nigh as difficult to end as to begin.
The bill which finally passed enlarged and made permanent the freedmen's bureau.
It was thus that the freedmen's bureau became a full fledged government of men.
Then amid all crouched the freed slave, bewildered between friend and foe.
They welcomed freedom with a cry.
So the cleft between the white and black south grew.
Next came the difficult question of labor.
Nevertheless, men strive to know.
The former slaves were intimidated, beaten, raped, and butchered by angry and revengeful men.
All this is easy, but it is neither sensible nor just.
By a grant of unconstitutional power.
The argument gathered tremendous strength south and north but its very strength was its weakness.
So justice and force joined hands.
Thus negro suffrage ended a civil war by beginning a race feud.
So the freedmen's bureau died, and its child was the fifteenth amendment.
The legacy of the freedmen's bureau is the heavy heritage of this generation.
Taxation without representation is the rule of their political life.
On the tainted air broods fear.
The problem of the twentieth century is the problem of the color line.
Know ye not who would be free themselves must strike the blow?
This atlanta compromise is by all odds the most notable thing in mr. washington's career.
One wonders what socrates and st. francis of assisi would say to this.
But the hushing of the criticism of honest opponents is a dangerous thing.
All this is the social student's inspiration and despair.
Stern financial and social stress after the war cooled much of the previous humanitarian ardor.
But he passed away in his prime.
Then came the new leader.
As a result of this tender of the palm branch, what has been the return?
The disfranchisement of the negro.
The legal creation of a distinct status of civil inferiority for the negro.
The steady withdrawal of aid from institutions for the higher training of the negro.
The education of youth according to ability.
First, it is the duty of black men to judge the south discriminatingly.
Each of these propositions is a dangerous half truth.
We cannot settle this problem by diplomacy and suaveness, by policy alone.
Die unsterblichen, die reinen, die nicht fuhlen, die nicht weinen!
Nicht die zarte jungfrau wahle, nicht der hirtin weiche seele!
I remember how but i wander.
There i found at last a little school.
The father was a quiet, simple soul, calmly ignorant, with no touch of vulgarity.
There was a crowd of children.
Two boys had gone away.
Then there was josie herself.
There was with them no affectation.
Come in, said the commissioner, come in.
Yes, that certificate will do.
What do you want a month?
The schoolhouse was a log hut, where colonel wheeler used to shelter his corn.
A pale blackboard crouched in the corner.
Seats for the children these puzzled me much.
The reality was rough plank benches without backs, and at times without legs.
It was a hot morning late in july when the school opened.
First came josie and her brothers and sisters.
There were the burkes, two brown and yellow lads, and a tiny haughty eyed girl.
At times the school would dwindle away, and i would start out.
But we'll start them again next week.
In the morning all were up and away before i thought of awaking.
For two summers i lived in this little world it was dull and humdrum.
These, in turn, leaned gingerly on a sad colored schoolhouse.
Then the soft melody and mighty cadences of negro song fluttered and thundered.
Ill could they be content, born without and beyond the world.
I had feared for jim.
At last the two came back together in the dark night.
The mother cooked supper, and josie emptied her purse, and the boys stole away.
Josie grew thin and silent, yet worked the more.
Josie helped them to sell the old farm, and they moved nearer town.
I paused to scent the breeze as i entered the valley.
A new young widow rents out their cabin to fat reuben.
There are babies a plenty, and one half witted girl.
My log schoolhouse was gone.
In its place stood progress and progress, i understand, is necessarily ugly.
I peeped through the window half reverently, and found things that were more familiar.
The blackboard had grown by about two feet, and the seats were still without backs.
There was the great double log house on the corner.
I remembered the broken, blighted family that used to live there.
The strong, hard face of the mother, with its wilderness of hair, rose before me.
I felt sure that ben and 'tildy would come to naught from such a home.
Doc burke saved a murder and a lynching that day.
So i hurried on, thinking of the burkes.
They used to have a certain magnificent barbarism about them that i liked.
I hurried by the cottage of the misborn neill boys.
It was empty, and they were grown into fat, lazy farm hands.
The burkes held a hundred acres, but they were still in debt.
Some day he must stop, for his massive frame is showing decline.
The mother wore shoes, but the lion like physique of other days was broken.
The children had grown up.
Rob, the image of his father, was loud and rough with laughter.
We splashed and waded, and the merry boy, perched behind me, chattered and laughed.
She had married a man and a farm twenty miles away.
The farm was fat with the growing crop.
We sat and talked that night after the chores were done.
My journey was done, and behind me lay hill and dale, and life and death.
How shall man measure progress there where the dark faced josie lies?
How many heartfuls of sorrow shall balance a bushel of wheat?
How hard a thing is life to the lowly, and yet how human and real!
Thus sadly musing, i rode to nashville in the jim crow car.
V of the wings of atalanta o black boy of atlanta!
And the nation talked of her striving.
If atlanta be not named for atalanta, she ought to have been.
How heavy a journey for weary feet!
Whither, then, is the new world quest of goodness and beauty and truth gone glimmering?
The hundred hills of atlanta are not all crowned with factories.
Such an institution the south of to day sorely needs.
The wings of atalanta are the coming universities of the south.
They alone can bear the maiden past the temptation of golden fruit.
Do not the apples lie in the very way of life?
So must men and nations build, not otherwise, not upside down.
Shall we teach them trades, or train them in liberal arts?
Nor can we pause here.
Fly, my maiden, fly, for yonder comes hippomenes!
Suppose this mad impulse within is all wrong, some mock mirage from the untrue?
Such curious kinks of the human mind exist and must be reckoned with soberly.
And yet they must not be encouraged by being let alone.
A hundred and fifty years ago our task would have seemed easier.
The land saw glimpses of a new destiny and the stirring of new ideals.
Especially has criticism been directed against the former educational efforts to aid the negro.
This development has been sharply ridiculed as a logical anomaly and flat reversal of nature.
The white teachers who flocked south went to establish such a common school system.
Southern whites would not teach them northern whites in sufficient numbers could not be had.
Among white southerners this feeling is widespread and positive.
A prominent southern journal voiced this in a recent editorial.
Are not too many students prematurely forced into this work?
Does it not have the effect of dissatisfying the young negro with his environment?
And do these graduates succeed in real life?
And what sort of men do they graduate?
They lived and ate together, studied and worked, hoped and harkened in the dawning light.
From such schools about two thousand negroes have gone forth with the bachelor's degree.
All this is needful work.
Who would do it if negroes did not?
How could negroes do it if they were not trained carefully for it?
But such transformation calls for singular wisdom and patience.
If you deplore their presence here, they ask, who brought us?
But these alone are not enough.
And finally, beyond all this, it must develop men.
I sit with shakespeare and he winces not.
So, wed with truth, i dwell above the veil.
Is this the life you grudge us, o knightly america?
Is this the life you long to change into the dull red hideousness of georgia?
Yet we did not nod, nor weary of the scene for this is historic ground.
How the africans poured in!
Thus like a snake the black population writhed upward.
But we must hasten on our journey.
If you wish to ride with me you must come into the jim crow car.
Usually the races are mixed in there but the white coach is all white.
We rumble south in quite a business like way.
At albany, in the heart of the black belt, we stop.
Well no, not exactly happy, but much happier than as though they had not come.
Twelve miles his plantation used to run, a regular barony.
He might be well to do, they say but he carouses too much in albany.
In times past there were cotton gins and machinery here but they have rotted away.
The whole land seems forlorn and forsaken.
Strange vicissitudes have met these whilom masters.
Only black tenants can stand such a system, and they only because they must.
Ten miles we have ridden to day and have seen no white face.
This, then, is the cotton kingdom, the shadow of a marvellous dream.
And where is the king?
He is six feet in height, with a sober face that smiles gravely.
Here is his gin house with new machinery just installed.
Three hundred bales of cotton went through it last year.
Two children he has sent away to school.
All is silence now, and ashes, and tangled weeds.
Yonder is another grove, with unkempt lawn, great magnolias, and grass grown paths.
A shabby, well built negro he is, unlucky and irresolute.
She married a policeman, and lives in savannah.
Now and again we come to churches.
Opposite the door is a square home made desk.
It is the cheerfulest schoolhouse i have seen in dougherty, save in town.
Back of the schoolhouse is a lodgehouse two stories high and not quite finished.
We turn now to the west along the county line.
I think i never before quite realized the place of the fence in civilization.
Here lies the negro problem in its naked dirt and penury.
And here are no fences.
For has he not fine fences?
And those over yonder, why should they build fences on the rack rented land?
It will only increase their rent.
It seemed quite a village.
Only in the cabins appeared now and then a bit of lazy life.
An old ragged black man, honest, simple, and improvident, told us the tale.
The agent's son embezzled the funds and ran off with them.
Then the agent himself disappeared.
A peasant girl was hoeing in the field, white turbaned and black limbed.
All this we saw, but the spell still lay upon us.
This is the black belt of georgia.
It is full of historic interest.
First there is the swamp, to the west, where the chickasawhatchee flows sullenly southward.
The shadow of an old plantation lies at its edge, forlorn and dark.
Osceola, the indian negro chieftain, had risen in the swamps of florida, vowing vengeance.
Men and women and children fled and fell before them as they swept into dougherty.
Then the false slime closing about them called the white men from the east.
Small wonder the wood is red.
Then came the black slaves.
Down in the guard house, there's where the blood ran.
With such foundations a kingdom must in time sway and fall.
Sheltered and secure, it became the place of refuge for families, wealth, and slaves.
Yet even then the hard ruthless rape of the land began to tell.
The red clay sub soil already had begun to peer above the loam.
The harder the slaves were driven the more careless and fatal was their farming.
It is a land of rapid contrasts and of curiously mingled hope and pain.
There is a store conducted by his black son, a blacksmith shop, and a ginnery.
Five miles below here is a town owned and controlled by one white new englander.
It is a beautiful land, this dougherty, west of the flint.
Here and there a man has raised his head above these murky waters.
If you don't look up you can't get up,' remarks jackson, philosophically.
Dark carter's neat barns would do credit to new england.
And them white folks will get it, too, said my yellow gossip.
Even then, however, the fields, as we proceed, begin to redden and the trees disappear.
A young black fellow greets us.
He is twenty two, and just married.
A slave at twenty two.
This plantation, owned now by a foreigner, was a part of the famous bolton estate.
Every year finds him deeper in debt.
The bolton convict farm formerly included the neighboring plantation.
Here it was that the convicts were lodged in the great log prison still standing.
What rent do you pay here?
I don't know, what is it, sam?
All we make, answered sam.
They are not happy, these black men whom we meet throughout this region.
And now and then it blazes forth in veiled but hot anger.
I remember one big red eyed black whom we met by the roadside.
As it is, he is hopelessly in debt, disappointed, and embittered.
Well, yes he laughed and flipped pebbles, and thought the world was as it was.
He had worked here twelve years and has nothing but a mortgaged mule.
Here and there we meet distinct characters quite out of the ordinary.
He was an old, hollow cheeked man, with a drawn and characterful brown face.
Made nothing for two years, but i reckon i've got a crop now.
The cotton looked tall and rich, and we praised it.
Then he added, eyeing us, oh, i gets along with white folks.
Beggars and vulgar speculators rose to rule over them, and their children went astray.
See yonder sad colored house, with its cabins and fences and glad crops!
Where was it to come from?
And the world passed on.
Quite a contrast to the southwestern part of dougherty county is the northwest.
Since then his poor relations and foreign immigrants have seized it.
He is smooth faced and brown, and is fencing up his pigs.
Further on lives jack delson, the most prosperous negro farmer in the county.
Six hundred and fifty acres he owns, and has eleven black tenants.
Then the character of the farms begins to change.
The rents are high, and day laborers and contract hands abound.
It is a keen, hard struggle for living here, and few have time to talk.
Tired with the long ride, we gladly drive into gillonsville.
Riding down the street, we stop at the preacher's and seat ourselves before the door.
Said the wife well, only this house.
But he never cashed them, kept putting me off.
Then the sheriff came and took my mule and corn and furniture furniture?
But furniture is exempt from seizure by law.
Well, he took it just the same, said the hard faced man.
And now the golden fleece is found not only found, but, in its birthplace, woven.
Perhaps they sprang from dragons' teeth.
So the cotton kingdom still lives the world still bows beneath her sceptre.
We seldom study the condition of the negro to day honestly and carefully.
It is so much easier to assume that we know it all.
The country is rich, yet the people are poor.
And if things went ill with the master, how fared it with the man?
The general character and arrangement of these dwellings remains on the whole unaltered.
The mass live in one and two room homes.
The size and arrangements of a people's homes are no unfair index of their condition.
There is no glass, porch, or ornamentation without.
Within is a fireplace, black and smoky, and usually unsteady with age.
Above all, the cabins are crowded.
We have come to associate crowding with homes in cities almost exclusively.
This is primarily because we have so little accurate knowledge of country life.
In such homes, then, these negro peasants live.
The number of separated persons is thirty five to the thousand, a very large number.
Nevertheless, here lies the seat of greatest moral danger.
The plague spot in sexual relations is easy marriage and easy separation.
This is no sudden development, nor the fruit of emancipation.
It is the plain heritage from slavery.
In those days sam, with his master's consent, took up with mary.
This widespread custom of two centuries has not been eradicated in thirty years.
The degree of ignorance cannot easily be expressed.
We may say, for instance, that nearly two thirds of them cannot read or write.
This but partially expresses the fact.
America is not another word for opportunity to all her sons.
We often forget that each unit in the mass is a throbbing human soul.
Over eighty eight per cent of them men, women, and children are farmers.
Indeed, this is almost the only industry.
Among this people there is no leisure class.
The land on the whole is still fertile, despite long abuse.
Just tolerable, he said just tolerable.
No he wasn't getting on at all.
Smith of albany furnishes him, and his rent is eight hundred pounds of cotton.
Can't make anything at that.
Why didn't he buy land!
Takes money to buy land.
What did such a mockery of freedom mean?
But he is seldom encouraged to save.
The currency of the black belt is cotton.
Moreover, the system is bound to bankrupt the tenant.
I remember once meeting a little one mule wagon on the river road.
A young black fellow sat in it driving listlessly, his elbows on his knees.
His dark faced wife sat beside him, stolid, silent.
Meat and meal, answered the man, stopping.
What did you pay for that meat?
It could have been bought for six or seven cents cash.
One dollar and ten cents is the cash price in town.
Yet it is not wholly his fault.
The negro farmer started behind, started in debt.
Once in debt, it is no easy matter for a whole race to emerge.
Such an economic organization is radically wrong.
The underlying causes of this situation are complicated but discernible.
Crime, and a cheap and dangerous socialism, are the inevitable results of this pondering.
I see now that ragged black man sitting on a log, aimlessly whittling a stick.
And what do the better classes of negroes do to improve their situation?
They have noted repeatedly scenes like one i saw last summer.
The other was fast asleep in the bottom of the wagon.
As we passed we noticed an ear of corn fall from the wagon.
They never saw it, not they.
Yes, the personification of shiftlessness.
They'll loaf before your face and work behind your back with good natured honesty.
They'll steal a watermelon, and hand you back your lost purse intact.
Yes, he replied, and so does yo' hogs.
To day the following economic classes are plainly differentiated among these negroes.
The change from cropper to tenant was accomplished by fixing the rent.
The average metayer pays from twenty to thirty per cent of his crop in rent.
Such laborers receive from thirty five to fifty cents a day during the working season.
A glance at the distribution of land among the black owners curiously reveals this fact.
Is it not strange compensation?
Finally, there are the varying forms of religious enterprise, of moral teaching and benevolent endeavor.
First, as to physical dwelling.
The winding and intricacy of the geographical color line varies, of course, in different communities.
Under such a system all labor is bound to suffer.
As a remedy for this, there is but one possible procedure.
Such leadership, such social teaching and example, must come from the blacks themselves.
If another complained of their venality, we replied, disfranchise them or put them in jail.
Here was a defenceless people suddenly made free.
Such a situation is bound to increase crime, and has increased it.
And here again the peculiar conditions of the south have prevented proper precautions.
If this is true of the whites, what of the blacks?
And yet the casual observer visiting the south sees at first little of this.
Why, said he, they were all black.
And yet this does not touch the kernel of the problem.
On the other hand, i have sincerely sought to let no unfair exaggerations creep in.
Both must change, or neither can improve to any great extent.
And the condition of the negro is ever the excuse for further discrimination.
Three things characterized this religion of the slave, the preacher, the music, and the frenzy.
The preacher is the most unique personality developed by the negro on american soil.
Numerous are the attractive lines of inquiry that here group themselves.
What did slavery mean to the african savage?
What was his attitude toward the world and life?
What seemed to him good and evil, god and devil?
Whither went his longings and strivings, and wherefore were his heart burnings and disappointments?
Underneath is a large assembly room with benches.
Entertainments, suppers, and lectures are held beside the five or six regular weekly religious services.
In the great city churches the same tendency is noticeable and in many respects emphasized.
Such, then, is the large development of the negro church since emancipation.
Two characteristic things must be noticed in regard to the church.
At the same time, the visible rite of baptism appealed strongly to their mystic temperament.
The methodists still form the second greatest denomination, with nearly a million members.
Slavery, then, was to him the dark triumph of evil over him.
Slave masters early realized this, and cheerfully aided religious propaganda within certain bounds.
Freedom became to him a real thing and not a dream.
He stood dumb and motionless before the whirlwind what had he to do with it?
Was it not the lord's doing, and marvellous in his eyes?
It is difficult to explain clearly the present critical stage of negro religion.
To day he is gone, but who is to blame for his going?
Is it not those very persons who mourn for him?
And how natural this is!
Patience, humility, and adroitness must, in these growing black youth, replace impulse, manliness, and courage.
With this sacrifice there is an economic opening, and perhaps peace and some prosperity.
Without this there is riot, migration, or crime.
The price of culture is a lie.
The soul, long pent up and dwarfed, suddenly expands in new found freedom.
Thou hast forgotten, o summer swallow, but the world shall end when i forget.
I handle it curiously, and watch perplexed its winking, breathing, and sneezing.
Why was his hair tinted with gold?
An evil omen was golden hair in my life.
Why had not the brown of his eyes crushed out and killed the blue?
For brown were his father's eyes, and his father's father's.
Holding in that little head ah, bitterly!
He unbowed pride of a hunted race, clinging with that tiny dimpled hand ah, wearily!
Ten days he lay there, a swift week and three endless days, wasting, wasting away.
And we spoke no word, and turned away.
Only in the chamber of death writhed the world's most piteous thing a childless mother.
I pant for a life full of striving.
Blithe was the morning of his burial, with bird and song and sweet smelling flowers.
The trees whispered to the grass, but the children sat with hushed faces.
And yet it seemed a ghostly unreal day, the wraith of life.
When men ask artists, not are they black?
Some morning this may be, long, long years to come.
If one must have gone, why not i?
Why may i not rest me from this restlessness and sleep from this wide waking?
Perhaps now he knows the all love, and needs not to be wise.
I saw alexander crummell first at a wilberforce commencement season, amid its bustle and crush.
Instinctively i bowed before this man, as one bows before the prophets of the world.
Fourscore years had he wandered in this same world of mine, within the veil.
So the black boy asked of sky and sun and flower the never answered why?
And loved, as he grew, neither the world nor the world's rough ways.
And before the bluff, kind hearted man the shadow seemed less dark.
Ye es, said his wife and alexander came.
The black boy trudged away.
Hast thou seen sorrow and the dull waters of hopelessness?
And to the lonely boy came a new dawn of sympathy and inspiration.
It did not wholly fade away, but diffused itself and lingered thick at the edges.
A vision of life came to the growing boy, mystic, wonderful.
He raised his head, stretched himself, breathed deep of the fresh new air.
And he girded himself to walk down the world.
This was the temptation of despair and the young man fought it doggedly.
And yet the fire through which alexander crummell went did not burn in vain.
Slowly and more soberly he took up again his plan of life.
More critically he studied the situation.
He worked and toiled, week by week, day by day, month by month.
First it came casually, in the cadence of a voice oh, colored folks?
Or perhaps more definitely what do you expect?
In voice and gesture lay the doubt the temptation of doubt.
How he hated it, and stormed at it furiously!
Of all the three temptations, this one struck the deepest.
He had outgrown so childish a thing.
He folded his vestments, put away the hymn books, and closed the great bible.
I have failed, he said simply.
And gaining courage by the confession, he added what i need is a larger constituency.
There are comparatively few negroes here, and perhaps they are not of the best.
I must go where the field is wider, and try again.
So the bishop sent him to philadelphia, with a letter to bishop onderdonk.
Bishop onderdonk read the letter hastily and frowned.
A little blue fly is trying to cross the yawning keyhole.
It spreads its tiny wings and buzzes merrily across, leaving the watcher wingless and alone.
Then the full weight of his burden fell upon him.
And i know not which be darker, no, not i.
So surged the thought within that lone black breast.
And saying this, he turned and passed into the valley of the shadow of death.
Half in despair, he wandered across the sea, a beggar with outstretched hands.
In the narrow new york parish his soul seemed cramped and smothered.
In the wild fever cursed swamps of west africa he stood helpless and alone.
No wonder the wanderers fall!
But alexander crummell it gave back.
And now that he is gone, i sweep the veil away and cry, lo!
The soul to whose dear memory i bring this little tribute.
Not that men are ignorant, what is truth?
Nay, but that men know so little of men.
He sat one morning gazing toward the sea.
He smiled and said, the gate is rusty on the hinges.
I wonder where he is to day?
While round about the morning stars sat singing.
It is a broad, restful place, with two large buildings outlined against the west.
But they shook their heads when his mother wanted to send him off to school.
It'll spoil him, ruin him, they said and they talked as though they knew.
But the white people shook their heads.
And still the legend lingered, when john comes.
It'll make a man of him, said the judge, college is the place.
And then he asked the shy little waitress, well, jennie, how's your john?
And neither world thought the other world's thought, save with a vague unrest.
For a long time the clay seemed unfit for any sort of moulding.
He stared at the gray haired man blankly, with great eyes.
Why, why, he faltered, but i haven't graduated!
When he came back to us he went to work with all his rugged strength.
Now and then his boots shone, and a new dignity crept into his walk.
Daily he found himself shrinking from the choked and narrow life of his native town.
And yet he always planned to go back to altamaha, always planned to work there.
A breath of air before the plunge, he said to himself in half apology.
Then, leaning back with a sigh, he said, this is the world.
A shade of annoyance passed over the escort's face.
The lady deftly changed the subject.
And the lady drew away.
Who had called him to be the slave and butt of all?
Then the movement changed, and fuller, mightier harmony swelled away.
Down in altamaha, after seven long years, all the world knew john was coming.
It was noontide on a gray and cloudy day when he came.
The people were distinctly bewildered.
This silent, cold man, was this john?
Where was his smile and hearty hand grasp?
Peared kind o' down in the mouf, said the methodist preacher thoughtfully.
Seemed monstus stuck up, complained a baptist sister.
And the crowd melted away.
The meeting of welcome at the baptist church was a failure.
Rain spoiled the barbecue, and thunder turned the milk in the ice cream.
When the speaking came at night, the house was crowded to overflowing.
The people moved uneasily in their seats as john rose to reply.
He spoke slowly and methodically.
Finally he urged unity, and deprecated especially religious and denominational bickering.
Let's leave all that littleness, and look higher.
Then, thinking of nothing else, he slowly sat down.
A painful hush seized that crowded mass.
He arose silently, and passed out into the night.
Long they stood together, peering over the gray unresting water.
I am afraid it does, he said.
And, john, are you glad you studied?
Yes, came the answer, slowly but positively.
Sitting on the kitchen steps, john stared at the corn, thoroughly perplexed.
What on earth had come over him?
Every step he made offended some one.
He sought to teach them at the church, and had outraged their deepest feelings.
The world seemed smooth and easy then.
He plunged squarely into the business.
You've come for the school, i suppose.
Well john, i want to speak to you plainly.
You know i'm a friend to your people.
We'll hold them under if we have to lynch every nigger in the land.
He hesitated a moment, and then said shortly, very well, we'll try you awhile.
The mother wept, the sisters sang.
The whole white town was glad.
So the argument often waxed hot between them.
Oh, nothin' in particulah, just his almighty air and uppish ways.
He's what i call a dangerous nigger.
Have you heard him say anything out of the way?
Why, no, but sally, our girl, told my wife a lot of rot.
Why, it's little black john, peggy's son, your old playfellow.
The young man's face flushed angrily, and then he laughed.
Nevertheless, he struggled hopefully on, and seemed to see at last some glimmering of dawn.
The attendance was larger and the children were a shade cleaner this week.
Even the booby class in reading showed a little comforting progress.
So john settled himself with renewed patience this afternoon.
Why, your little brother even wouldn't tell a story that way, now would he?
Naw, suh, he cain't talk.
All right now let's try again 'if the man ' john!
John, this school is closed.
You children can go home and get to work.
I'll lock the door myself.
He tried a nap, but it was too warm.
So he sauntered out into the fields, complaining disconsolately, good lord!
How long will this imprisonment last!
Why, there isn't even a girl worth getting up a respectable flirtation with, he growled.
Why, i never noticed before what a trim little body she is.
Why, you haven't kissed me since i came home, he said gaily.
But a wilful mood had seized the young idler, and he caught at her arm.
I cannot live here longer.
And then the fierce, buried anger surged up into his throat.
He waved his arms and hurried wildly up the path.
The great brown sea lay silent.
The dying day bathed the twisted oaks and mighty pines in black and gold.
There came from the wind no warning, not a whisper from the cloudless sky.
She gazed at him dimly and faltered, no'th, honey, is yo' gwine no'th agin?
The night deepened he thought of the boys at johnstown.
He wondered how brown had turned out, and carey?
Was it music, or the hurry and shouting of men?
And the world whistled in his ears.
Ever since i was a child these songs have stirred me strangely.
They stopped at wilberforce, the oldest of negro schools, where a black bishop blessed them.
What are these songs, and what do they mean?
I can easily believe this of some, of many.
Do ba na co ba, ge ne me, ge ne me!
Ben d' nu li, nu li, nu li, ben d' le.
One of these i have just mentioned.
Another whose strains begin this book is nobody knows the trouble i've seen.
In these songs, i have said, the slave spoke to the world.
Such a message is naturally veiled and half articulate.
Of nearly all the songs, however, the music is distinctly sorrowful.
Like all primitive folk, the slave stood near to nature's heart.
Winter'll soon be over, was the picture of life and death to a tropical imagination.
The monotonous toil and exposure is painted in many words.
Elsewhere comes the cry of the motherless and the farewell, farewell, my only child.
Back to his ancient forests again.
Especially is this true of bible phrases.
The minor cadences of despair change often to triumph and calm confidence.
Is such a hope justified?
Do the sorrow songs sing true?
Why should aeschylus have sung two thousand years before shakespeare was born?
Why has civilization flourished in europe, and flickered, flamed, and died in africa?
Before the pilgrims landed we were here.
Nor has our gift of the spirit been merely passive.
Are not these gifts worth the giving?
Is not this work and striving?
Would america have been america without her negro people?
Even so is the hope that sang in the songs of my fathers well sung.
It is base and evil.
It is as if we were speaking alone to no ears but our own.
We have broken the laws.
But this is not the only sin upon us.
We have committed a greater crime, and for this crime there is no name.
The flame of the candle stands still in the air.
Nothing moves in this tunnel save our hand on the paper.
We are alone here under the earth.
It is a fearful word, alone.
But we have broken many laws.
We stole the candle from the larder of the home of the street sweepers.
Nothing matters save the work, our secret, our evil, our precious work.
Still, we must also write, for may the council have mercy upon us!
We wish to speak for once to no ears but our own.
We are twenty one years old.
But we cannot change our bones nor our body.
We were born with a curse.
It has always driven us to thoughts which are forbidden.
It has always given us wishes which men may not wish.
This is our wonder and our secret fear, that we know and do not resist.
We strive to be like all our brother men, for all men must be alike.
There are no men but only the great we , one, indivisible and forever.
We repeat this to ourselves, but it helps us not.
These words were cut long ago.
But those times were evil.
All men are good and wise.
For we are not like our brothers.
Men must learn till they reach their fifteenth year.
Then they go to work.
By the grace of our brothers are we allowed our lives.
We exist through, by and for our brothers who are the state.
It was not that the learning was too hard for us.
It was that the learning was too easy.
This is a great sin, to be born with a head which is too quick.
The teachers told us so, and they frowned when they looked upon us.
So we fought against this curse.
We tried to forget our lessons, but we always remembered.
And we were lashed more often than all the other children.
You shall do that which the council of vocations shall prescribe for you.
We preferred some work and some lessons to the others.
But we loved the science of things.
We wished to know about all the things which make the earth around us.
We asked so many questions that the teachers forbade it.
And we learned much from our teachers.
We learned how to bleed men to cure them of all ailments.
We loved the science of things.
We could ask questions of these, for they do not forbid questions.
And questions give us no rest.
But we cannot resist it.
We ask, why must we know, but it has no answer to give us.
We must know that we may know.
So we wished to be sent to the home of the scholars.
It was evil and we dared not face our brothers in the morning.
For men may wish nothing for themselves.
And we who were fifteen and all the teachers came into the great hall.
But we wished not to be a leader, even though it is a great honor.
We wished to be a scholar.
They seemed older than the marble of the temple of the world council.
They sat before us and they did not move.
And we saw no breath to stir the folds of their white togas.
So we were happy, and proud of ourselves and of our victory over ourselves.
So we went into the home of the street sweepers.
It is a grey house on a narrow street.
When the bell rings, we all arise from our beds.
The sky is green and cold in our windows to the east.
Then we go to work again.
We come back to have our dinner, which lasts one hour.
Other columns of men arrive from the homes of the different trades.
The sky is a soggy purple when we return to the home.
The plays are about toil and how good it is.
Then we walk back to the home in a straight column.
The moths beat against the street lanterns.
We go to our beds and we sleep, till the bell rings again.
Thus must all men live until they are forty.
At forty, they are worn out.
The old ones do not work, for the state takes care of them.
They sit in the sun in summer and they sit by the fire in winter.
They do not speak often, for they are weary.
The old ones know that they are soon to die.
And it was our curse which drove us to our crime.
So we carried them to the city cesspool.
And then we made the discovery.
It was on a day of the spring before last.
We know, when we look into each other's eyes.
We came together to the great ravine behind the theatre.
It is empty save for trees and weeds.
It was old and rusted by many rains.
We pulled with all our strength, but we could not move it.
But we pulled at the grill and it gave way.
It is forbidden, they answered.
We said the council does not know of this hole, so it cannot be forbidden.
And everything which is not permitted by law is forbidden.
But we said we shall go, none the less.
They were frightened, but they stood by and watched us go.
We hung on the iron rings with our hands and our feet.
We could see nothing below us.
But still we went down.
Then our foot touched the ground.
We rubbed our eyes, for we could not see.
It was a great tunnel.
But there was an unbroken night ahead.
Only the iron tracks glowed through it, straight and white, calling us to follow.
But we could not follow, for we were losing the puddle of light behind us.
So we turned and we crawled back, our hand on the iron line.
And our heart beat in our fingertips, without reason.
We knew suddenly that this place was left from the unmentionable times.
Hundreds upon hundreds of years ago men knew secrets which we have lost.
And we thought this is a foul place.
They are damned who touch the things of the unmentionable times.
We returned to the earth.
But we could not speak and we stood looking upon them.
They backed away, as if they dared not touch us.
Then they smiled, but it was not a gay smile it was lost and pleading.
But still we could not speak.
Our voice was hard and there was no mercy in our voice.
We said we shall not report our find to the city council.
We shall not report it to any men.
They stood straight all of a sudden and they answered rather would we die.
Then, we said, keep silent.
And if ever we surrender it, we shall surrender our life with it also.
But if you wish it so, we shall obey you.
Rather shall we be evil with you than good with all our brothers.
May the council have mercy upon both our hearts!
Then we walked away together and back to the home of the street sweepers.
And we walked in silence.
Each night, for three hours, we are under the earth, alone.
We have stolen glass vials and powders and acids from the home of the scholars.
Now we sit in the tunnel for three hours each night and we study.
We have built an oven of the bricks we gathered in the streets.
We burn the wood we find in the ravine.
This is a great offense.
Manuscripts are rare and they are kept in the home of the scholars.
So we sit under the earth and we read the stolen scripts.
Two years have passed since we found this place.
We have learned things which are not in the scripts.
We have solved secrets of which the scholars have no knowledge.
But we wish no end to our quest.
Strange are the ways of evil.
We are false in the faces of our brothers.
We are defying the will of our councils.
The evil of our crime is not for the human mind to probe.
And yet there is no shame in us and no regret.
We say to ourselves that we are a wretch and a traitor.
But we feel no burden upon our spirit and no fear in our heart.
And in our heart strange are the ways of evil!
In our heart there is the first peace we have known in twenty years.
We wish to speak it, but we dare not speak it above a whisper.
There is a hedge along the road, and beyond the hedge lie the fields.
Their body was straight and thin as a blade of iron.
We stood still for the first time did we know fear, and then pain.
And we stood still that we might not spill this pain more precious than pleasure.
We know not whether they looked at us also, but we think they did.
Then one day they came close to the hedge, and suddenly they turned to us.
There was no smile on their face, and no welcome.
But their face was taut, and their eyes were dark.
Then they turned as swiftly, and they walked away from us.
But the following day, when we came to the road, they smiled.
They smiled to us and for us.
And we smiled in answer.
They were not looking upon us, but upon the sky.
Every morning thereafter, we greeted each other with our eyes.
They raised their hand to their forehead and moved it as we had.
We do not wonder at this new sin of ours.
We do not know why we think of them.
We have given them a name in our thoughts.
We call them the golden one.
But it is a sin to give men names which distinguish them from other men.
Yet we call them the golden one, for they are not like the others.
The golden one are not like the others.
We had broken so many laws, and today we have broken one more.
Today, we spoke to the golden one.
The golden one were kneeling alone at the moat which runs through the field.
Their face did not move and they did not avert their eyes.
Then they asked what is your name?
No, we answered, nor are you one of our sisters.
If you see us among scores of women, will you look upon us?
Your eyes, they said, are not like the eyes of any among men.
They understood our thought, for they lowered their eyes for the first time.
What relation can they bear?
But the seeds flew wildly, for the hand of the golden one was trembling.
But it is not proper to sing without reason, save at the social meetings.
Indeed you are happy, they answered.
How else can men be when they live for their brothers?
And now, sitting here in our tunnel, we wonder about these words.
It is forbidden, not to be happy.
The heads of our brothers are bowed.
Fear walks through the city, fear without name, without shape.
All men feel it and none dare to speak.
We feel it also, when we are in the home of the street sweepers.
But here, in our tunnel, we feel it no longer.
The air is pure under the ground.
There is no odor of men.
And these three hours give us strength for our hours above the ground.
If this is a vice, then we wish no virtue.
Yet our brothers are not like us.
All is not well with our brothers.
And they are glad when the candles are blown for the night.
We do not wish to look upon the uncharted forest.
We do not wish to think of it.
But ever do our eyes return to that black patch upon the sky.
These men do not return.
But our councils say that this is only a legend.
We have heard that there are many uncharted forests over the land, among the cities.
These few were the evil ones and they were conquered.
Then great fires raged over the land.
Great mountains of flame stood in the squares of the cities for three months.
Then came the great rebirth.
The words of the evil ones...
The words of the unmentionable times... what are the words which we have lost?
May the council have mercy upon us!
We shall not ask this question and we shall not think it.
We shall not call death upon our head.
And this is the unspeakable word, which no men may speak nor hear.
But sometimes, and it is rare, sometimes, somewhere, one among men find that word.
But when they speak it they are put to death.
We have seen one of such men burned alive in the square of the city.
We were a child then, ten years old.
They brought the transgressor out into the square and they led them to the pyre.
The transgressor were young and tall.
They had hair of gold and eyes blue as morning.
They walked to the pyre, and their step did not falter.
And a monstrous thought came to us then, which has never left us.
We had heard of saints.
Perhaps it had only seemed to us.
And we have discovered it alone, and we alone are to know it.
Now let us be lashed for it, if we must.
But we think that the council of scholars is blind.
We know, for we have found a secret unknown to all our brothers.
We know not what this power is nor whence it comes.
But we know its nature, we have watched it and worked with it.
We saw it first two years ago.
It was dead, yet it moved.
Some power unknown to men was making it move.
We could not understand it.
Then, after many tests, we found the answer.
We followed it in preference to all our studies.
We came to know that we had found the greatest power on earth.
For it defies all the laws known to men.
We found that it causes lightning, and never have men known what causes lightning.
We have seen the lightning strike it again and again.
We have built strange things with this discovery of ours.
We used for it the copper wires which we found here under the ground.
We have walked the length of our tunnel, with a candle lighting the way.
These things help us in our work.
We do not know, but we shall learn.
We have fought against saying it, but now it is said.
We forget all men, all laws and all things save our metals and our wires.
So much is still to be learned!
Part four many days passed before we could speak to the golden one again.
But the golden one stood alone at the hedge, waiting.
What name have you given us?
For a long time we could not speak.
Then we said such thoughts as these are forbidden, golden one.
But you think such thoughts as these and you wish us to think them.
We looked into their eyes and we could not lie.
They stepped back, and their eyes were wide and still.
Speak these words again, they whispered.
But they did not answer, and we knew it.
Our dearest one, we whispered.
Never have men said this to women.
And we could not speak.
It is cooler in the fields, they said, and there is water to drink.
Yes, we answered, but we cannot cross the hedge.
We shall bring the water to you, they said.
We do not know if we drank that water.
We raised our head and stepped back.
And the golden one stepped back, and stood looking upon their hands in wonder.
Part five we made it.
We brought it forth from the night of the ages.
We know not what we are saying.
We look upon the light which we have made.
We stood, and we held our head in our hands.
We could not conceive of that which we had created.
We had touched no flint, made no fire.
Yet here was light, light that came from nowhere, light from the heart of metal.
We blew out the candle.
Then we thought of the meaning of that which lay before us.
The power of the sky can be made to do men's bidding.
Then we knew what we must do.
Our discovery is too great for us to waste our time in sweeping the streets.
We must not keep our secret to ourselves, nor buried under the ground.
We must bring it into the sight of all men.
In a month, the world council of scholars is to meet in our city.
We shall confess everything to them.
They will see, understand and forgive.
For our gift is greater than our transgression.
We must guard our tunnel as we had never guarded it before.
We care not about our body, but our light is...
For the first time do we care about our body.
We stretch out our arms.
For the first time do we know how strong our arms are.
Part six we have not written for thirty days.
For thirty days we have not been here, in our tunnel.
It happened on that night when we wrote last.
When we remembered it, the sand had run out.
We hastened to the theatre.
But the big tent stood grey and silent against the sky.
The streets of the city lay before us, dark and empty.
So we walked to the home of the street sweepers.
So when the oldest of them asked us where have you been?
We thought of our glass box and of our light, and we forgot all else.
And we answered we will not tell you.
The oldest did not question us further.
Lash them until they tell.
So we were taken to the stone room under the palace of corrective detention.
This room has no windows and it is empty save for an iron post.
The judges were small, thin men, grey and bent.
They gave the signal to the two strong hooded ones.
But we did not cry out.
The lash whistled like a singing wind.
We tried to count the blows, but we lost count.
We knew that the blows were falling upon our back.
Only we felt nothing upon our back any longer.
Then we saw a fist before us.
The light.... then we knew nothing.
We opened our eyes, lying on our stomach on the brick floor of a cell.
But we could not move our body.
We lay in our cell for many days.
But we shook our head, lying before them on the floor.
We counted each day and each night as it passed.
Then, tonight, we knew that we must escape.
For tomorrow the world council of scholars is to meet in our city.
It was easy to escape from the palace of corrective detention.
The locks are old on the doors and there are no guards about.
Our body is healthy and strength returns to it speedily.
We lunged against the door and it gave way.
What matter they now, the scars upon our back!
We shall put before them the greatest gift ever offered to men.
We shall tell them the truth.
We shall hand to them, as our confession, these pages we have written.
Our blessing upon you, our brothers!
Tomorrow we shall be one of you again.
Tomorrow... part seven it is dark here in the forest.
The leaves rustle over our head, black against the last gold of the sky.
The moss is soft and warm.
We have no bed now, save the moss, and no future, save the beasts.
No men stopped us at the gate.
All the heads of the council turned to us as we entered.
For you do not look like a scholar.
A street sweeper walking in upon the world council of scholars!
It is not to be believed!
It is against all the rules and all the laws!
But we knew how to stop them.
We matter not, nor our transgression.
It is only our brother men who matter.
Listen to us, for we hold the future of mankind in our hands.
We placed our glass box upon the table before them.
Not a hand moved in that hall, as we spoke, nor an eye.
And we stood still, our eyes upon the wire.
And slowly, slowly as a flush of blood, a red flame trembled in the wire.
But terror struck the men of the council.
We looked upon them and we laughed and said fear nothing, our brothers.
There is a great power in these wires, but this power is tamed.
We give it to you.
Still they would not move.
We give you the power of the sky!
We give you the key to the earth!
Take it, and let us be one of you, the humblest among you.
Let us throw away our candles and our torches.
Let us flood our cities with light.
Let us bring a new light to men!
But they looked upon us, and suddenly we were afraid.
For their eyes were still, and small, and evil.
Have you nothing to say to us?
They moved to the table and the others followed.
No such crime has ever been committed, and it is not for us to judge.
Nor for any small council.
We looked upon them and we pleaded our brothers!
Let the will of the council be done upon our body.
What will you do with the light?
Do all your brothers think that?
You have worked on this alone?
The candle is a great boon to mankind, as approved by all men.
Therefore it cannot be destroyed by the whim of one.
This touched upon thousands and thousands of men working in scores of states.
We cannot alter the plans again so soon.
This thing, they said, must be destroyed.
And all the others cried as one it must be destroyed!
Then we leapt to the table.
We seized our box, we shoved them aside, and we ran to the window.
We fell, but we never let the box fall from our hands.
We ran blindly, and men and houses streaked past us in a torrent without shape.
We knew not where we were going.
Trees taller than we had ever seen before stood over us in great silence.
We were in the uncharted forest.
Our glass box lay beside us.
We lay thus for a long time.
Then we rose, we took our box and walked on into the forest.
It mattered not where we went.
We knew that men would not follow us, for they never enter the uncharted forest.
We had nothing to fear from them.
The forest disposes of its own victims.
This gave us no fear either.
So we walked on, our box in our arms, our heart empty.
Whatever days are left to us, we shall spend them alone.
And we have heard of the corruption to be found in solitude.
We know these things, but we do not care.
We care for nothing on earth.
We have lied to ourselves.
We have not built this box for the good of our brothers.
We built it for its own sake.
It is above all our brothers to us, and its truth above their truth.
We have not many days to live.
We are walking to the fangs awaiting us somewhere among the great, silent trees.
There is not a thing behind us to regret.
Then a blow of pain struck us, our first and our only.
We thought of the golden one.
We thought of the golden one whom we shall never see again.
We are one of the damned.
We awoke when a ray of sunlight fell across our face.
We did not wish to move.
We could also rise, or run, or leap, or fall down again.
Then we took our glass box, and we went on into the forest.
The trees parted before us, calling us forward.
The forest seemed to welcome us.
We stopped when we felt hunger.
We saw birds in the tree branches, and flying from under our footsteps.
We picked a stone and we sent it as an arrow at a bird.
We knelt by the stream and we bent down to drink.
We sat still and we held our breath.
For our face and our body were beautiful.
We walked on till the sun had set.
And suddenly, for the first time this day, we remembered that we are the damned.
We remembered it, and we laughed.
Now, we cannot speak, for we cannot understand.
Part nine we have not written for many days.
We did not wish to speak.
For we needed no words to remember that which has happened to us.
It was on our second day in the forest that we heard steps behind us.
We hid in the bushes, and we waited.
We leapt forward, we ran to them, and we stood looking upon the golden one.
And they could not speak.
We dared not come too close to them.
We asked, and our voice trembled how did you come to be here, golden one?
We found the marks of your feet across the plain where no men walk.
We have followed you, they said, and we shall follow you wherever you go.
If danger threatens you, we shall face it also.
If it be death, we shall die with you.
You are damned, and we wish to share your damnation.
Your eyes are as a flame, but our brothers have neither hope nor fire.
Your mouth is cut of granite, but our brothers are soft and humble.
Your head is high, but our brothers cringe.
You walk, but our brothers crawl.
We wish to be damned with you, rather than blessed with all our brothers.
Do as you please with us, but do not send us away from you.
Then they knelt, and bowed their golden head before us.
We had never thought of that which we did.
We seized their body and we pressed our lips to theirs.
We stood together for a long time.
Then we said our dearest one.
Fear nothing of the forest.
There is no danger in solitude.
We have no need of our brothers.
It is our own world, golden one, a strange, unknown world, but our own.
Then we walked on into the forest, their hand in ours.
We have walked for many days.
The forest has no end, and we seek no end.
We have made a bow and many arrows.
At night, we choose a clearing, and we build a ring of fires around it.
We sleep in the midst of that ring, and the beasts dare not attack us.
But we do not have to hasten.
The days before us are without end, like the forest.
We go on and we bless the earth under our feet.
But questions come to us again, as we walk in silence.
Everything which comes from the many is good.
Everything which comes from one is evil.
This have we been taught with our first breath.
We have broken the law, but we have never doubted it.
Yet now, as we walk through the forest, we are learning to doubt.
But we lived not, when we toiled for our brothers, we were only weary.
There is no joy for men, save the joy shared with all their brothers.
There is some error, one frightful error, in the thinking of men.
We do not know, but the knowledge struggles within us, struggles to be born.
Today, the golden one stopped suddenly and said we love you.
But they frowned and shook their head and looked at us helplessly.
No, they whispered, that is not what we wished to say.
And we felt torn, torn for some word we could not find.
We came upon it today, at sunrise.
For many days we had been crossing a chain of mountains.
We had never heard of these mountains, nor seen them marked on any map.
We climbed paths where the wild goat dared not follow.
We thought that it was a fire and stopped.
But the flame was unmoving, yet blinding as liquid metal.
So we climbed toward it through the rocks.
The house had two stories and a strange roof flat as a floor.
We both knew it without words this house was left from the unmentionable times.
We turned to the golden one and we asked are you afraid?
But they shook their head.
Today, we could only look and try to believe the sight of our eyes.
Never had we seen rooms so full of light.
We found the sleeping hall and we stood in awe upon its threshold.
For it was a small room and there were only two beds in it.
What kind of world did they have, the men of the unmentionable times?
We found garments, and the golden one gasped at the sight of them.
Some crumbled to dust as we touched them.
But others were of heavier cloth, and they felt soft and new in our fingers.
Never had we seen such a number of them, nor of such strange shape.
Tomorrow, we shall begin to read these scripts.
We shall never leave this house, we said, nor let it be taken from us.
This is our home and the end of our journey.
So be it to the end of our days.
Your will be done, they said.
Then we went out to gather wood for the great hearth of our home.
We brought water from the stream which runs among the trees under our windows.
They stood before it and they looked and looked upon their own body.
And now we look upon the earth and sky.
It seems to us it asks a sign from us, a spark, a first commandment.
We look upon our hands.
And yet it stirs no fear within our heart, but only silent reverence and pity.
May knowledge come to us!
My hands... my spirit... my sky... my forest...
This earth of mine.... what must i say besides?
I stand here on the summit of the mountain.
I lift my head and i spread my arms.
This, my body and spirit, this is the end of the quest.
I wished to know the meaning of things.
I wished to find a warrant for being.
I need no warrant for being, and no word of sanction upon my being.
I am the warrant and the sanction.
They point in but one direction.
I know not and i care not.
For i know what happiness is possible to me on earth.
And my happiness needs no higher aim to vindicate it.
My happiness is not the means to any end.
It is its own goal.
It is its own purpose.
Neither am i the means to any end others may wish to accomplish.
I am not a tool for their use.
I am not a servant of their needs.
I am not a bandage for their wounds.
I am not a sacrifice on their altars.
I do not surrender my treasures, nor do i share them.
I guard my treasures my thought, my will, my freedom.
And the greatest of these is freedom.
I owe nothing to my brothers, nor do i gather debts from them.
I ask none to live for me, nor do i live for any others.
I covet no man's soul, nor is my soul theirs to covet.
And to earn my love, my brothers must do more than to have been born.
I honor men with my love.
But honor is a thing to be earned.
I shall choose friends among men, but neither slaves nor masters.
For in the temple of his spirit, each man is alone.
Let each man keep his temple untouched and undefiled.
What is my joy if all hands, even the unclean, can reach into it?
What is my wisdom, if even the fools can dictate to me?
What is my life, if i am but to bow, to agree and to obey?
But i am done with this creed of corruption.
This god, this one word i.
I wept in deliverance and in pity for all mankind.
I understood the blessed thing which i had called my curse.
I read many books for many days.
She looked at me and the first words she spoke were i love you.
So let us choose our names.
And he suffered for his deed as all bearers of light must suffer.
It shall be your name, said the golden one.
It shall be my name, said the golden one.
My future is clear before me.
I shall live here, in my own house.
I shall take my food from the earth by the toil of my own hands.
I shall learn many secrets from my books.
It was the power that moved their greatest inventions.
I have found the engine which produced this light.
I shall learn how to repair it and how to make it work again.
I shall learn how to use the wires which carry this power.
For they have nothing to fight me with, save the brute force of their numbers.
Gaea is pregnant with my child.
Our son will be raised as a man.
He will be taught to say i and to bear the pride of it.
He will be taught to walk straight and on his own feet.
He will be taught reverence for his own spirit.
They will follow me and i shall lead them to my fortress.
These are the things before me.
There is nothing to take a man's freedom away from him, save other men.
To be free, a man must be free of his brothers.
At first, man was enslaved by the gods.
But he broke their chains.
Then he was enslaved by the kings.
He was enslaved by his birth, by his kin, by his race.
What brought it to pass?
What disaster took their reason away from men?
What whip lashed them to their knees in shame and submission?
The worship of the word we.
Thus did all thought, all science, all wisdom perish on earth.
They were answered as i have been answered and for the same reasons.
Perhaps they cried out in protest and in warning.
But men paid no heed to their warning.
And they chose to perish, for they knew.
To them, i send my salute across the centuries, and my pity.
Theirs is the banner in my hand.
For the battle they lost can never be lost.
For that which they died to save can never perish.
It may sleep, but it will awaken.
It may wear chains, but it will break through.
And man will go on.
And word of it will reach every corner of the earth.
For the freedom of man.
The word which will not die, should we all perish in battle.
All went right, and the groom lay snoring with his hand upon the golden saddle.
Go straight on, and in the evening you will arrive at a castle.
What can it know about the matter?
One of these lucky beings was neighbour hans.
Seven long years he had worked hard for his master.
Ah!’ said hans aloud, what a fine thing it is to ride on horseback!
What a noble heart that good man has!’ thought he.
Hans had not thought of looking to that.
Luckily a butcher soon came by, driving a pig in a wheelbarrow.
What a shame to take my horse, and give me only a dry cow!
If i kill her, what will she be good for?
I hate cow beef it is not tender enough for me.
The next man he met was a countryman carrying a fine white goose.
Feel,’ said he, how heavy it is, and yet it is only eight weeks old.
Your pig may get you into a scrape.
I was dreadfully afraid when i saw you that you had got the squire’s pig.
If you have, and they catch you, it will be a bad job for you.
The least they will do will be to throw you into the horse pond.
Can you swim?’ poor hans was sadly frightened.
Good man,’ cried he, pray get me out of this scrape.
Tis not everyone would do so much for you as that.
After all,’ thought he, that chap is pretty well taken in.
I have much the best of the bargain.
How happy my mother will be!
Talk of a pig, indeed!
Now this fairy could take any shape she pleased.
Now there was once a maiden whose name was jorinda.
Then he shrank for fear, turned pale, and trembled.
Jorinda was just singing, the ring dove sang from the willow spray, well a day!
Poor jorindel saw the nightingale was gone but what could he do?
He could not speak, he could not move from the spot where he stood.
When the charm is around her, and the spell has bound her, hie away!
Away!’ on a sudden jorindel found himself free.
He prayed, he wept, he sorrowed, but all in vain.
Jorindel was very glad indeed to see this.
He looked around at the birds, but alas!
What makes you pant so, my friend?’ said the ass.
Pray, my good lady,’ said the ass, what’s the matter with you?
Well, donkey,’ said chanticleer, what do you see?’ what do i see?’ replied the ass.
When all was ready a signal was given, and they began their music.
Make yourself easy,’ said the wolf, i will give you some good advice.
The straw, however, began to burn, broke in two pieces, and fell into the stream.
So he asked his kinsmen, and nobles, and friends, and neighbours.
When that was eaten, the sparrow asked him whether he had had enough now.
There,’ cried the sparrow, thou cruel villain, thou hast killed my friend the dog.
Now mind what i say.
What an unlucky wretch i am!’ cried he.
Unlucky wretch that i am!’ cried he.
Not wretch enough yet!’ said the sparrow.
Unlucky wretch that i am!’ said he.
Miserable wretch that i am!’ cried he.
Alas!’ said he to his wife, what ill luck has befallen me!
My wine is all spilt, and my horses all three dead.’ alas!
But the sparrow sat on the outside of the window, and cried carter!
The sparrow now hopped in, perched upon the window seat, and cried, carter!
The twelve dancing princesses there was a king who had twelve beautiful daughters.
A king’s son soon came.
At this, too, the youngest sister was terribly frightened, but the eldest always silenced her.
And when the king asked him.
But the fish said, pray let me live!
And he stood at the water’s edge, and said o man of the sea!
I will not be king.’ then i will,’ said she.
What a fine thing it is to be king!
Why should you wish to be emperor?’ said the fisherman.
Husband,’ said she, go to the fish!
I will be pope next.’ o wife, wife!’ said he, how can you be pope?
At last, as she was dropping asleep, morning broke, and the sun rose.
Our parents are honest people!
Then she began to bewail her loss, and said, alas!
And the third night he did the same.
What name did they give the child?’ top off!’ said the cat quite coolly.
All good things go in threes,’ said she, i am asked to stand godmother again.
It will not please you more than the others,’ said the cat.
I have never seen it in print.
Alas!’ said the mouse, now i see what has happened, now it comes to light!
You are a true friend!
You have devoured all when you were standing godmother.
Verily, that is the way of the world.
What will become of me?’ and the lock answered her, and said alas!
But falada saw it all, and marked it well.
Let him after it go!
So they watched the geese till it grew dark.
And then he heard her say blow, breezes, blow!
The needle ran into him and this time the pain was not in his head.
Now, mice, be ready, and, wheels, run steady!
On the way they met the fox.
Where are you going, chanticleer?’ said he.
To bury my partlet,’ said the other.
May i go with you?’ said the fox.
So on they went till they came to a rapid stream.
How shall we get over?’ said chanticleer.
What was to be done?
At length the woman hoped that god was about to grant her desire.
She at once made herself a salad of it, and ate it greedily.
Rapunzel grew into the most beautiful child under the sun.
Then he heard a song, which was so charming that he stood still and listened.
You wicked child,’ cried the enchantress.
What do i hear you say!
He escaped with his life, but the thorns into which he fell pierced his eyes.
But when she came in, and went to the beds, both the children were gone.
The children, however, saw them coming from a distance.
And the cook scolded them and said you fools!
Then came a peasant woman down the street crying good jams, cheap!
Who invited you?’ said the little tailor, and drove the unbidden guests away.
It had to go into his pocket with the cheese.
I am just on my way thither, and want to try my luck.
The bird, delighted with its liberty, rose, flew away and did not come back.
How does that shot please you, comrade?’ asked the tailor.
When he had fallen down again without injury, the giant said what is this?
I leapt over the tree because the huntsmen are shooting down there in the thicket.
The little tailor went onwards, always following his own pointed nose.
What is to be the end of this?’ they said among themselves.
He thought about it for a long time, and at last found good counsel.
After a while he perceived both giants.
Then the little tailor leapt down.
He had not long to seek.
The king still would not give him the promised reward, and made a third demand.
I’ll put a screw into that business,’ said the little tailor.
I smote seven at one blow.
So the little tailor was and remained a king to the end of his life.
The boy was called hansel and the girl gretel.
But i feel very sorry for the poor children, all the same,’ said the man.
Then they all set out together on the way to the forest.
His father said hansel, what are you looking at there and staying behind for?
When at last they awoke, it was already dark night.
The children, however, were still awake and had heard the conversation.
Then they fell asleep and evening passed, but no one came to the poor children.
It was now three mornings since they had left their father’s house.
We will set to work on that,’ said hansel, and have a good meal.
Do come in, and stay with me.
Then good food was set before them, milk and pancakes, with sugar, apples, and nuts.
Scream as he might, it would not help him.
Now, then, gretel,’ she cried to the girl, stir yourself, and bring some water.
Dear god, do help us,’ she cried.
How they did rejoice and embrace each other, and dance about and kiss each other!
Then all anxiety was at an end, and they lived together in perfect happiness.
When people are too well off they always begin to long for something new.
She went on a little farther, till she came to a tree full of apples.
Then she carefully gathered the apples together in a heap and walked on again.
But the old woman called after her, what are you afraid of, dear child?
Take us out, take us out, or alas!
Presently she came to the apple tree.
Shake me, shake me, i pray my apples, one and all, are ripe,’ it cried.
So mother holle very soon got tired of her, and told her she might go.
Good day, little red cap,’ said he.
The wolf thought to himself what a tender young creature!
What a nice plump mouthful she will be better to eat than the old woman.
Meanwhile the wolf ran straight to the grandmother’s house and knocked at the door.
Who is there?’ little red cap,’ replied the wolf.
But, grandmother, what big eyes you have!’ she said.
Do i find you here, you old sinner!’ said he.
Then all three were delighted.
But the grandmother saw what was in his thoughts.
My house is out there in the dark forest,’ he said.
This is a murderers’ den.
Tonight, when the robbers are all asleep, we will flee together.
They were all drunk, and paid no heed to her cries and lamentations.
Have you looked behind the large cask?’ said one of the others.
As soon as the girl was assured of this, she came from behind the cask.
All night long they walked, and it was morning before they reached the mill.
Then the girl told her father all that had happened.
The day came that had been fixed for the marriage.
Tell us something.’ i will tell you a dream, then,’ said the bride.
Gently!’ two strangers came up.
Where would you like to sit?’ said one of them.
Good night, my masters!’ said he, i’m off!
When tom found they were gone, he came out of his hiding place.
What dangerous walking it is,’ said he, in this ploughed field!
This is lucky,’ said he, i can sleep here very well’ and in he crept.
How woefully he was undone!
What crosses and sorrows happen to us all in this world!
At last down he went into her stomach.
In such and such a house,’ said tom, describing his own father’s house.
I am here, the wolf has swallowed me.’ and his father said, heaven be praised!
And when he was dead they cut open his body, and set tommy free.
Reel away, reel away, straw into gold!’ till, long before morning, all was done again.
Little does my lady dream rumpelstiltskin is my name!
Some witch told you that!
It suddenly occurred to her who knows?
Presently the guest came, and knocked politely and courteously at the house door.
And he used to look towards the table with his eyes full of tears.
The young wife scolded him, but he said nothing and only sighed.
What are you doing there?’ asked the father.
The cow herd answered it is still standing out there eating.
Then the woman served up four different things, roast meat, salad, cakes, and wine.
Just as they were about to sit down and eat, there was a knocking outside.
The woman said oh, heavens!
Now go on,’ said he.
Then the peasant once more pinched the raven’s head till he croaked loudly.
The parson went to the crowd, and declared that the mass had been said.
Then they came and rolled the barrel towards the water.
Then the peasants were astonished, and said peasant, from whence do you come?
The beer ran into the jug and catherine stood looking on.
It’s all gone, and what can’t be cured must be endured ,’ said catherine.
When she got to the cellar stairs she saw what had happened.
What a lucky thing,’ said she, that we kept that meal!
At last she overtook frederick, who desired her to give him something to eat.
Then she gave him the dry bread.
Where are the butter and cheese?’ said he.
Alas!’ said he, what a clever wife i have!
Frederick slipped down on the other side, and picked up some stones.
Be quiet, my child,’ said the old woman, and you shall have it.
Then she hurried away with her lover.
She went into the kitchen, but found no one.
She went into the room to the bed.
What did she see there?
Her own child, whose head she had cut off, bathed in her blood.
From that time forth, strange things happened in the shepherd’s house.
Swiftly he sprang towards it, and threw a white cloth over it.
Nevertheless, she promised not to go away, but to continue keeping house for the shepherd.
By and by in came the masters of the cottage.
They lighted up their seven lamps, and saw at once that all was not right.
Bless me!’ said the old woman, how badly your stays are laced!
There’s an end to all thy beauty,’ said the spiteful queen, and went away home.
There you may lie,’ said the queen, and went her way.
Do you think it is poisoned?
Now will i pronounce thy sentence.
Those upstairs waited for the drink, but clever elsie still did not come.
Elsie why do you weep?’ asked the maid.
Ah,’ she answered, have i not reason to weep?
What misfortune has happened then?’ asked he.
Shall i cut first, or shall i sleep first?
I will sleep first.’ then she lay down among the corn and fell asleep.
Then she ran out of the village, and no one has seen her since.
Full threepence,’ replied the countryman.
Oh, for heaven’s sake!’ cried the miser, master!
Pray let the fiddle alone.
For heaven’s sake don’t listen to him!
Besides that, the sisters plagued her in all sorts of ways, and laughed at her.
Fine clothes,’ said the first pearls and diamonds,’ cried the second.
Blackbird, thrush, and chaffinch gay, hither, hither, haste away!
One and all come help me, quick!
But the mother said, no, no!
So she shook two dishes of peas into the ashes.
Before half an hour’s time all was done, and out they flew again.
The shoe is too small, and not made for you!
So he turned his horse and brought her also back again.
And when they came to the hazel tree, the white dove sang home!
The shoe was made for you!
Eating the snake had given him power of understanding the language of animals.
In vain he declared his innocence he was dismissed with no better answer.
The servant stood by and listened.
We must shift for ourselves, and yet we cannot fly!
One day she wanted to go into the forest and fetch some food.
We will not open the door,’ cried they, you are not our mother.
Truly, this is the way of mankind.
But who should come in but the wolf!
They were terrified and wanted to hide themselves.
Soon afterwards the old goat came home again from the forest.
What a sight she saw there!
The house door stood wide open.
She sought her children, but they were nowhere to be found.
She called them one after another by name, but no one answered.
Then you may imagine how she wept over her poor children.
At length in her grief she went out, and the youngest kid ran with her.
They embraced their dear mother, and jumped like a tailor at his wedding.
Then cried he what rumbles and tumbles against my poor bones?
The wolf is dead!’ and danced for joy round about the well with their mother.
The two brothers wanted to catch two, and roast them.
So he sat down upon a stone and cried.
The third task was the hardest.
It was to choose out the youngest and the best of the king’s three daughters.
This was long before daybreak and then they bustled away as quick as lightning.
The next day the wife said to the shoemaker.
They loved each other dearly, but sorrowed much that they had no children.
In front of the house there was a court, in which grew a juniper tree.
Her husband buried her under the juniper tree, and wept bitterly for her.
Mother,’ said the boy, how dreadful you look!
Yes, give me an apple.’ the thought came to her that she would kill him.
Down went the lid, and off went the little boy’s head.
Then she was overwhelmed with fear at the thought of what she had done.
If only i can prevent anyone knowing that i did it,’ she thought.
She was so terrified at this, that she ran crying and screaming to her mother.
Bird,’ he said, how beautifully you sing!
Bird,’ he said, what a beautiful song that is you sing!
The father, the mother, and little marleen were having their dinner.
Then the bird came flying towards the house and settled on the roof.
I must go outside and see the bird nearer,’ said the man.
Ah, do not go!’ cried the wife.
The bird threw the millstone down on her head, and she was crushed to death.
One day he said to himself, what shall i do with it?
Where did you get the seed?
Or is it only your good luck?
Compared to this seat, all the learning of the schools is as empty air.
Goodbye, mother.’ goodbye, hans.’ hans comes to gretel.
Good day, gretel.’ good day, hans.
Good evening, mother.’ good evening, hans.
What do you bring that is good?’ i bring nothing.
I want to have something given to me.’ gretel presents hans with a knife.
When he gets home it is suffocated.
The dogs come and devour the bacon.
Then hans goes to his mother.
After some time he took it in his head that he would travel to rome.
Good day, dear mr fox, how are you?
How is all with you?
Have you the cheek to ask how i am getting on?
How many arts do you understand?’ i understand but one,’ replied the cat, modestly.
What art is that?’ asked the fox.
Ah, mr fox,’ cried the cat.
You with your hundred arts are left in the lurch!
I do not know yet,’ said he.
Then come with me, and be a star gazer.
So he kissed all three, and bid them goodbye.
But the lion was an enchanted prince.
The wedding feast was held, and they lived happily together a long time.
I will also give thee this nut,’ continued the night wind.
Jip!’ then up he sprang, and moved off, dragging the lion behind him.
Tomorrow, you shall only do me a very trifling piece of work.
He found the blue light, and made her a signal to draw him up again.
He saw very well that he could not escape death.
I must do everything you bid me,’ said the little man.
Nor was it long before the little man reappeared.
It is all done,’ said he, and the witch is already hanging on the gallows.
What further commands has my lord?’ inquired the dwarf.
The soldier returned to the town from which he came.
Are you there?’ cried the soldier, get to your work at once!
She, however, did everything he bade her, without opposition, silently and with half shut eyes.
I will give you a piece of advice.
And again the princess was compelled to do servant’s work until cock crow.
Next morning the king had the entire town searched for his daughter’s shoe.
Have no fear,’ said the latter to his master.
When he was led forth to die, he begged a last favour of the king.
What is it?’ asked the king.
The following day the old woman said to him, what is this?
How shall i be able to get there?’ asked the man.
She could not see him for he still wore his cloak.
Meanwhile he had gone outside again and mounted his horse and thrown off the cloak.
And this was the little grey man’s doing.
So they had to spend the night with the goose.
He was astonished at this and called out hi!
Your reverence, whither away so quickly?
This king once fell very ill so ill that nobody thought he could live.
I know what would,’ said the little old man it is the water of life.
No,’ said the prince, i do not.
You have had the trouble and we shall have the reward.
Pray, with all your cleverness, why did not you manage to keep your eyes open?
And the wedding was held, and the merry bells run.
Then her father said to her dearest child, why are you so sad?
At last the boy said to him.
Have you brought me what you said you would?’ said the dwarf to the merchant.
Then at last, after a long talk, they came to terms.
They lived together very happily, and the queen had a son.
So the giants were left behind with no goods to share or quarrel about.
Alas!’ said she to herself, was i not once set free?
But the princes, peers, and great men mocked at him.
Then they turned upon him and tried to seize him but he drew his sword.
Yes, he was, he said.
Then he was to go with him and bring back the stolen money.
They led him to the spot where the money was concealed.
Then said one after the other, who has eaten from my little plate?
And who has been drinking out of my little glass?’ caw!
When it became known that the old fox was dead, suitors presented themselves.
The maid heard someone standing at the house door, knocking.
He had two tails, but he did not fare better than the first.
At length came a young fox.
What’s the matter?’ said the miller.
After this he went back to the castle, where he found everything he wanted.
They are always saying it makes me shudder, it makes me shudder!
It does not make me shudder,’ thought he.
He will never be good for anything as long as he lives!
The boy cried a second time what do you want here?
Just go there and you will see if it was he.
He has thrown my husband down the steps so that he broke his leg.
What wicked tricks are these?’ said he.
He was standing there by night like one intent on doing evil.
Go out of my sight.
Here are fifty talers for you.
But they sat there and did not stir, and the fire caught their clothes.
How cold we are!’ you fools!’ cried he, what are you crying about?
Oh,’ said he, what long nails you have!
When he came back he fanned the embers of his fire again and warmed himself.
Then he looked round and saw a great bed in the corner.
That is the very thing for me,’ said he, and got into it.
Have you learnt how to shudder yet?’ no,’ said he, it is all in vain.
Hullo!’ cried he, another half belongs to this.
There, now they will roll better!’ said he.
He lay down and quietly fell asleep.
Next morning the king came to inquire after him.
How has it fared with you this time?’ asked he.
He felt his face, but it was cold as ice.
After a short time the dead man became warm too, and began to move.
Then came the six men and carried him away again.
I cannot manage to shudder,’ said he.
He was old, however, and had a long white beard.
Softly, softly, do not talk so big.
I can do better than that,’ said the youth, and went to the other anvil.
Now i have you,’ said the youth.
The youth drew out the axe and let him go.
Then he woke up and cried oh, what makes me shudder so?
What makes me shudder so, dear wife?
The first was too fat he’s as round as a tub,’ said she.
The next was too tall what a maypole!’ said she.
The next was too short what a dumpling!’ said she.
Whose are these beautiful green meadows?’ said she.
Whose is this noble city?’ said she.
Am not i good enough for you?’ at last they came to a small cottage.
Then she began to cry, and knew not what to do.
Everything was ready, and all the pomp and brightness of the court was there.
Then she bitterly grieved for the pride and folly which had brought her so low.
I am the fiddler who has lived with you in the hut.
I brought you there because i really loved you.
I am also the soldier that overset your stall.
Joy was in every face and every heart.
They bound him with cords, and led him away to the castle.
And from this time forth everyone could again go into the forest with safety.
The door opened with difficulty, and the boy pinched his fingers.
She knew nothing about it, and sought the key, but it was gone.
She called the boy, but no one answered.
If you do all i bid you, you shall fare well.
He took it quickly out, but it was already quite gilded.
Iron hans came, and already knew what had happened.
You have let a hair fall into the well,’ said he.
You can imagine how terrified the poor boy was!
You have not stood the trial and can stay here no longer.
Go forth into the world, there you will learn what poverty is.
At length he went to the palace, and asked if they would take him in.
The cook, however, had pity on him, and exchanged him for the gardener’s boy.
With these he departed, but he cared nothing for the gold pieces.
Not long afterwards, the country was overrun by war.
What do you desire?’ asked the wild man.
They asked, too under what hedge have you been lying sleeping all the time?
What do you desire?’ asked he.
They rode back and announced this to the king.
The following day the king’s daughter asked the gardener about his boy.
So the messengers came home, and had had all their trouble for nothing.
Thus cat skin lived for a long time very sorrowfully.
I did,’ answered the cook.
In the winter snow white lit the fire and hung the kettle on the hob.
The kettle was of brass and shone like gold, so brightly was it polished.
I must go into the forest and guard my treasures from the wicked dwarfs.
The bear ran away quickly, and was soon out of sight behind the trees.
A short time afterwards the mother sent her children into the forest to get firewood.
I will run and fetch someone,’ said rose red.
You senseless goose!’ snarled the dwarf why should you fetch someone?
Some time afterwards snow white and rose red went to catch a dish of fish.
They ran to it and found it was the dwarf.
Was it not enough to clip off the end of my beard?
Now you have cut off the best part of it.
I cannot let myself be seen by my people.
Immediately they heard a loud, piteous cry.
You would not feel me between your teeth.
Now he has got his well deserved punishment.
The old mother lived peacefully and happily with her children for many years.
Throughout their lives they remained close friends, and both studied law at marburg university.
The project gutenberg ebook of metamorphosis, by franz kafka translated by david wyllie.
Gregor then turned to look out the window at the dull weather.
Drops of rain could be heard hitting the pane, which made him feel quite sad.
Oh, god , he thought, what a strenuous career it is that i've chosen!
Travelling day in and day out.
It can all go to hell!
He slid back into his former position.
Getting up early all the time , he thought, it makes you stupid.
You've got to get enough sleep.
Other travelling salesmen live a life of luxury.
But who knows, maybe that would be the best thing for me.
He'd fall right off his desk!
That's when i'll make the big change.
First of all though, i've got to get up, my train leaves at five.
And he looked over at the alarm clock, ticking on the chest of drawers.
Had the alarm clock not rung?
Yes, but was it possible to quietly sleep through that furniture rattling noise?
True, he had not slept peacefully, but probably all the more deeply because of that.
What should he do now?
The office assistant was the boss's man, spineless, and with no understanding.
What about if he reported sick?
And what's more, would he have been entirely wrong in this case?
There was a cautious knock at the door near his head.
Gregor , somebody called it was his mother it's quarter to seven.
Didn't you want to go somewhere?
Gregor, gregor , he called, what's wrong?
At the other side door his sister came plaintively gregor?
But it became difficult after that, especially as he was so exceptionally broad.
But it was something that had to be risked.
Then there was a ring at the door of the flat.
For a moment everything remained quiet.
They're not opening the door , gregor said to himself, caught in some nonsensical hope.
There was a loud thump, but it wasn't really a loud noise.
We don't know what to say to him.
And anyway, he wants to speak to you personally.
So please open up this door.
I'm sure he'll be good enough to forgive the untidiness of your room.
Then the chief clerk called good morning, mr. samsa .
He isn't well, please believe me.
Why else would gregor have missed a train!
The lad only ever thinks about the business.
His idea of relaxation is working with his fretsaw.
Can the chief clerk come in to see you now then?
Asked his father impatiently, knocking at the door again.
So why did his sister not go and join the others?
She had probably only just got up and had not even begun to get dressed.
And why was she crying?
There was no need to worry about things like that yet.
Gregor was still there and had not the slightest intention of abandoning his family.
I am astonished, quite astonished.
And nor is your position all that secure.
I'm slightly unwell, an attack of dizziness, i haven't been able to get up.
I'm still in bed now.
I'm quite fresh again now, though.
I'm just getting out of bed.
It's not quite as easy as i'd thought.
I'm quite alright now, though.
It's shocking, what can suddenly happen to a person!
They must have noticed it.
I don't know why i didn't let you know at work!
But you always think you can get over an illness without staying at home.
Please, don't make my parents suffer!
Maybe you haven't read the latest contracts i sent in.
Did you understand a word of all that?
His sister called from the other side.
They communicated across gregor's room.
You'll have to go for the doctor straight away.
Gregor is ill. quick, get the doctor.
Did you hear the way gregor spoke just now?
How had his sister managed to get dressed so quickly?
Gregor, in contrast, had become much calmer.
Meanwhile, it had become very quiet in the next room.
Gregor slowly pushed his way over to the door with the chair.
Listen , said the chief clerk in the next room, he's turning the key.
Then he lay his head on the handle of the door to open it completely.
Which sounded like the soughing of the wind.
Will you please just let me leave?
So where are you going, in to the office?
Will you report everything accurately, then?
I know that nobody likes the travellers.
That's just prejudice but they have no particular reason to think better of it.
Gregor, though, did think about the future.
If only his sister were here!
But his sister was not there, gregor would have to do the job himself.
Mother, mother , said gregor gently, looking up at her.
If only his father would stop that unbearable hissing!
It was making gregor quite confused.
The door was slammed shut with the stick, then, finally, all was quiet.
He spent the whole night there.
Gregor's little legs whirred, at last he could eat.
Am i less sensitive than i used to be, then?
No one drank very much either.
Gregor only remained close to his sister now.
His father was healthy but old, and lacking in self confidence.
Would gregor's elderly mother now have to go and earn money?
Would his sister have to go and earn money?
It had even become very unpleasant for him, now, whenever she entered the room.
She left the sheet where it was.
Gregor listened very closely to all this, and approved fully.
Can't you understand i have to see him?
Gregor's wish to see his mother was soon realised.
This lasted a very long time.
So she refused to let her mother dissuade her.
It was enough to attract his mother's attention.
She stood very still, remained there a moment, and then went back out to grete.
What shall we take now, then?
Said grete and looked around.
Her eyes met those of gregor on the wall.
Well, she could certainly try it!
He sat unyielding on his picture.
He would rather jump at grete's face.
Shouted his sister, glowering at him and shaking her fist.
That was the first word she had spoken to him directly since his transformation.
Then there was someone at the door.
His father had arrived home.
Were his first words grete's appearance must have made everything clear to him.
His father, though, was not in the mood to notice subtleties like that ah!
Gregor drew his head back from the door and lifted it towards his father.
Because of his injuries, gregor had lost much of his mobility probably permanently.
All of them were usually very quiet nowadays.
He would just sink deeper into his chair.
This is what peace i get in my old age!
Gregor hardly slept at all, either night or day.
Gregor, on the other hand, ought not to be neglected.
Now, though, the charwoman was here.
Or look at the old dung beetle there!
Aren't you coming any closer, then?
Gregor had almost entirely stopped eating.
Unnecessary clutter was something they could not tolerate, especially if it was dirty.
They had moreover brought most of their own furnishings and equipment with them.
All these things found their way into gregor's room.
The dustbins from the kitchen found their way in there too.
The food was steaming, and filled the room with its smell.
The family themselves ate in the kitchen.
The gentlemen stood as one, and mumbled something into their beards.
Then, once they were alone, they ate in near perfect silence.
I'd like to eat something , said gregor anxiously, but not anything like they're eating.
And here i am, dying!
We can stop it straight away.
The gentlemen stepped back into the room and waited.
No one noticed him, though.
Yet gregor's sister was playing so beautifully.
Was he an animal if music could captivate him so?
He was silent and looked straight ahead as if waiting for something.
With that, he took hold of the door handle and slammed the door.
Throughout all this, gregor had lain still where the three gentlemen had first seen him.
He was sure that everyone would turn on him any moment, and he waited.
Maybe you can't see it, but i can.
She's absolutely right , said gregor's father to himself.
Gregor's sister rushed to his mother and put her hand on her forehead.
Her words seemed to give gregor's father some more definite ideas.
I can't endure it any more.
But as it is ...
It's got to go , shouted his sister, that's the only way, father.
You've got to get rid of the idea that that's gregor.
We've only harmed ourselves by believing it for so long.
How can that be gregor?
Father, look, just look , she suddenly screamed, he's starting again!
But gregor had had no intention of frightening anyone, least of all his sister.
He stopped and looked round.
They seemed to have realised his good intention and had only been alarmed briefly.
Now they all looked at him in unhappy silence.
Maybe now they'll let me turn round , thought gregor and went back to work.
No one was making him rush any more, everything was left up to him.
As soon as he had finally finished turning round he began to move straight ahead.
He did not turn his head until he had reached the doorway.
With his last glance he saw that his mother had now fallen completely asleep.
He was hardly inside his room before the door was hurriedly shut, bolted and locked.
The sudden noise behind gregor so startled him that his little legs collapsed under him.
It was his sister who had been in so much of a rush.
Gregor asked himself as he looked round in the darkness.
He soon made the discovery that he could no longer move at all.
He also felt relatively comfortable.
He thought back of his family with emotion and love.
He watched as it slowly began to get light everywhere outside the window too.
But then, each from his own side, they hurried out of bed.
Now then , said mr. samsa, let's give thanks to god for that .
He crossed himself, and the three women followed his example.
He didn't eat anything for so long.
The food came out again just the same as when it went in .
The cleaner shut the door and opened the window wide.
It was already the end of march, after all.
The middle gentleman asked the cleaner irritably.
It was now quite light in the room.
Said mr. samsa, indicating the door and without letting the women from him.
Asked the middle of the three gentlemen somewhat disconcerted, and he smiled sweetly.
Mr. samsa merely opened his eyes wide and briefly nodded to him several times.
What is it you want then?
Asked mrs. samsa, whom the cleaner had the most respect for.
That's all been sorted out.
Then he called out come here, then.
Let's forget about all that old stuff, shall we.
Come and give me a bit of attention .
They had the tram, filled with warm sunshine, all to themselves.
All the time, grete was becoming livelier.
End of the project gutenberg ebook of metamorphosis, by franz kafka translated by david wyllie.
Mr. bennet replied that he had not.
Mr. bennet made no answer.
Do you not want to know who has taken it?
You want to tell me, and i have no objection to hearing it.
Is he married or single?
Single, my dear, to be sure!
A single man of large fortune four or five thousand a year.
What a fine thing for our girls!
How can it affect them?
My dear mr. bennet, replied his wife, how can you be so tiresome!
You must know that i am thinking of his marrying one of them.
Is that his design in settling here?
Nonsense, how can you talk so!
My dear, you flatter me.
In such cases, a woman has not often much beauty to think of.
It is more than i engage for, i assure you.
Only think what an establishment it would be for one of them.
You are over scrupulous, surely.
But you are always giving her the preference.
Mr. bennet, how can you abuse your own children in such a way?
You have no compassion for my poor nerves.
You mistake me, my dear.
They are my old friends.
I have heard you mention them with consideration these last twenty years at least.
Ah, you do not know what i suffer.
Depend upon it, my dear, that when there are twenty, i will visit them all.
Her mind was less difficult to develop.
She was a woman of mean understanding, little information, and uncertain temper.
When she was discontented, she fancied herself nervous.
It was then disclosed in the following manner.
I do not believe mrs. long will do any such thing.
She has two nieces of her own.
She is a selfish, hypocritical woman, and i have no opinion of her.
Don't keep coughing so, kitty, for heaven's sake!
Have a little compassion on my nerves.
You tear them to pieces.
Kitty has no discretion in her coughs, said her father she times them ill.
I do not cough for my own amusement, replied kitty fretfully.
When is your next ball to be, lizzy?
A fortnight's acquaintance is certainly very little.
One cannot know what a man really is by the end of a fortnight.
The girls stared at their father.
Mrs. bennet said only, nonsense, nonsense!
What can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation?
I cannot quite agree with you there .
Mary wished to say something sensible, but knew not how.
While mary is adjusting her ideas, he continued, let us return to mr. bingley.
I am sick of mr. bingley, cried his wife.
I am sorry to hear that but why did not you tell me that before?
How good it was in you, my dear mr. bennet!
But i knew i should persuade you at last.
I was sure you loved your girls too well to neglect such an acquaintance.
Well, how pleased i am!
What an excellent father you have, girls!
Said she, when the door was shut.
Her report was highly favourable.
Sir william had been delighted with him.
Nothing could be more delightful!
Mrs. bennet was quite disconcerted.
Such amiable qualities must speak for themselves.
What a contrast between him and his friend!
Come, darcy, said he, i must have you dance.
You had much better dance.
You know how i detest it, unless i am particularly acquainted with my partner.
At such an assembly as this it would be insupportable.
I would not be so fastidious as you are, cried mr. bingley, for a kingdom!
She is the most beautiful creature i ever beheld!
Mr. bingley followed his advice.
Mr. darcy walked off and elizabeth remained with no very cordial feelings toward him.
The evening altogether passed off pleasantly to the whole family.
Mrs. bennet had seen her eldest daughter much admired by the netherfield party.
Mr. bingley had danced with her twice, and she had been distinguished by his sisters.
They found mr. bennet still up.
I wish you had been there.
Jane was so admired, nothing could be like it.
Only think of that , my dear he actually danced with her twice!
And she was the only creature in the room that he asked a second time.
First of all, he asked miss lucas.
I was so vexed to see him stand up with her!
For god's sake, say no more of his partners.
Oh that he had sprained his ankle in the first dance!
My dear, i am quite delighted with him.
He is so excessively handsome!
And his sisters are charming women.
I never in my life saw anything more elegant than their dresses.
I dare say the lace upon mrs. hurst's gown here she was interrupted again.
Mr. bennet protested against any description of finery.
So high and so conceited that there was no enduring him!
He walked here, and he walked there, fancying himself so very great!
Not handsome enough to dance with!
I quite detest the man.
So much ease, with such perfect good breeding!
His character is thereby complete.
But that is one great difference between us.
Compliments always take you by surprise, and me never.
No thanks to his gallantry for that.
Well, he certainly is very agreeable, and i give you leave to like him.
You have liked many a stupider person.
You are a great deal too apt, you know, to like people in general.
You never see a fault in anybody.
All the world are good and agreeable in your eyes.
I never heard you speak ill of a human being in your life.
I know you do and it is that which makes the wonder.
Affectation of candour is common enough one meets with it everywhere.
And so you like this man's sisters, too, do you?
Their manners are not equal to his.
But they are very pleasing women when you converse with them.
In understanding, darcy was the superior.
Bingley was by no means deficient, but darcy was clever.
In that respect his friend had greatly the advantage.
Bingley was sure of being liked wherever he appeared, darcy was continually giving offense.
The manner in which they spoke of the meryton assembly was sufficiently characteristic.
Miss bennet he acknowledged to be pretty, but she smiled too much.
The distinction had perhaps been felt too strongly.
By nature inoffensive, friendly, and obliging, his presentation at st. james's had made him courteous.
You were mr. bingley's first choice.
Yes but he seemed to like his second better.
You mean jane, i suppose, because he danced with her twice.
And his answering immediately to the last question 'oh!
The eldest miss bennet, beyond a doubt there cannot be two opinions on that point.
My overhearings were more to the purpose than yours , eliza, said charlotte.
Mr. darcy is not so well worth listening to as his friend, is he?
To be only just tolerable .
Are you quite sure, ma'am?
Is not there a little mistake?
I certainly saw mr. darcy speaking to her.
With them he is remarkably agreeable.
I do not believe a word of it, my dear.
If he had been so very agreeable, he would have talked to mrs. long.
I believe, ma'am, i may safely promise you never to dance with him.
If i may so express it, he has a right to be proud.
Vanity and pride are different things, though the words are often used synonymously.
A person may be proud without being vain.
I would keep a pack of foxhounds, and drink a bottle of wine a day.
She mentioned this to her friend miss lucas.
Remember, eliza, that he does not know jane's disposition as you do.
But these are not jane's feelings she is not acting by design.
She has known him only a fortnight.
This is not quite enough to make her understand his character.
Not as you represent it.
Happiness in marriage is entirely a matter of chance.
You make me laugh, charlotte but it is not sound.
To this discovery succeeded some others equally mortifying.
His doing so drew her notice.
It was at sir william lucas's, where a large party were assembled.
That is a question which mr. darcy only can answer.
With great energy but it is always a subject which makes a lady energetic.
You are severe on us.
It will be her turn soon to be teased, said miss lucas.
I am going to open the instrument, eliza, and you know what follows.
Always wanting me to play and sing before anybody and everybody!
Her performance was pleasing, though by no means capital.
There is nothing like dancing after all.
I consider it as one of the first refinements of polished society.
You saw me dance at meryton, i believe, sir.
Yes, indeed, and received no inconsiderable pleasure from the sight.
Do you often dance at st. james's?
Do you not think it would be a proper compliment to the place?
You have a house in town, i conclude?
You cannot refuse to dance, i am sure when so much beauty is before you.
Mr. darcy is all politeness, said elizabeth, smiling.
Elizabeth looked archly, and turned away.
I was never more annoyed!
What would i give to hear your strictures on them!
Your conjecture is totally wrong, i assure you.
My mind was more agreeably engaged.
Mr. darcy replied with great intrepidity miss elizabeth bennet.
How long has she been such a favourite?
And pray, when am i to wish you joy?
That is exactly the question which i expected you to ask.
Nay, if you are serious about it, i shall consider the matter is absolutely settled.
Her father had been an attorney in meryton, and had left her four thousand pounds.
Their visits to mrs. phillips were now productive of the most interesting intelligence.
Every day added something to their knowledge of the officers' names and connections.
I have suspected it some time, but i am now convinced.
If my children are silly, i must hope to be always sensible of it.
Yes but as it happens, they are all of them very clever.
This is the only point, i flatter myself, on which we do not agree.
Well, jane, make haste and tell us make haste, my love.
It is from miss bingley, said jane, and then read it aloud.
Come as soon as you can on receipt of this.
My brother and the gentlemen are to dine with the officers.
Yours ever, caroline bingley with the officers!
I wonder my aunt did not tell us of that .
Dining out, said mrs. bennet, that is very unlucky.
Can i have the carriage?
I had much rather go in the coach.
But, my dear, your father cannot spare the horses, i am sure.
They are wanted in the farm, mr. bennet, are they not?
They are wanted in the farm much oftener than i can get them.
She did at last extort from her father an acknowledgment that the horses were engaged.
Her hopes were answered jane had not been gone long before it rained hard.
Her sisters were uneasy for her, but her mother was delighted.
The rain continued the whole evening without intermission jane certainly could not come back.
This was a lucky idea of mine, indeed!
My kind friends will not hear of my returning till i am better.
I am not afraid of her dying.
People do not die of little trifling colds.
She will be taken good care of.
As long as she stays there, it is all very well.
I would go and see her if i could have the carriage.
I shall be very fit to see jane which is all i want.
Is this a hint to me, lizzy, said her father, to send for the horses?
No, indeed, i do not wish to avoid the walk.
The distance is nothing when one has a motive only three miles.
I shall be back by dinner.
We will go as far as meryton with you, said catherine and lydia.
Elizabeth accepted their company, and the three young ladies set off together.
Mr. darcy said very little, and mr. hurst nothing at all.
The latter was thinking only of his breakfast.
Her inquiries after her sister were not very favourably answered.
The advice was followed readily, for the feverish symptoms increased, and her head ached acutely.
Jane was by no means better.
I shall never forget her appearance this morning.
She really looked almost wild.
I could hardly keep my countenance.
Very nonsensical to come at all!
Why must she be scampering about the country, because her sister had a cold?
Her hair, so untidy, so blowsy!
Her dirty petticoat quite escaped my notice.
What could she mean by it?
It shows an affection for her sister that is very pleasing, said bingley.
Not at all, he replied they were brightened by the exercise.
I think i have heard you say that their uncle is an attorney in meryton.
Yes and they have another, who lives somewhere near cheapside.
That is capital, added her sister, and they both laughed heartily.
Mr. hurst looked at her with astonishment.
Do you prefer reading to cards?
Said he that is rather singular.
Miss eliza bennet, said miss bingley, despises cards.
She is a great reader, and has no pleasure in anything else.
He immediately offered to fetch her others all that his library afforded.
Elizabeth assured him that she could suit herself perfectly with those in the room.
What a delightful library you have at pemberley, mr. darcy!
It ought to be good, he replied, it has been the work of many generations.
And then you have added so much to it yourself, you are always buying books.
There is not a finer county in england than derbyshire.
With all my heart i will buy pemberley itself if darcy will sell it.
I am talking of possibilities, charles.
Is miss darcy much grown since the spring?
Said miss bingley will she be as tall as i am?
She is now about miss elizabeth bennet's height, or rather taller.
How i long to see her again!
Such a countenance, such manners!
And so extremely accomplished for her age!
Her performance on the pianoforte is exquisite.
My dear charles, what do you mean?
Yes, all of them, i think.
They all paint tables, cover screens, and net purses.
Your list of the common extent of accomplishments, said darcy, has too much truth.
Nor i, i am sure, said miss bingley.
Yes, i do comprehend a great deal in it.
I am no longer surprised at your knowing only six accomplished women.
I rather wonder now at your knowing any .
I never saw such a woman.
I never saw such capacity, and taste, and application, and elegance, as you describe united.
As all conversation was thereby at an end, elizabeth soon afterwards left the room.
But, in my opinion, it is a paltry device, a very mean art.
Whatever bears affinity to cunning is despicable.
Miss bingley was not so entirely satisfied with this reply as to continue the subject.
Bingley was quite uncomfortable his sisters declared that they were miserable.
The note was immediately dispatched, and its contents as quickly complied with.
Mrs. bennet, accompanied by her two youngest girls, reached netherfield soon after the family breakfast.
Indeed i have, sir, was her answer.
She is a great deal too ill to be moved.
Mr. jones says we must not think of moving her.
We must trespass a little longer on your kindness.
It must not be thought of.
My sister, i am sure, will not hear of her removal.
Mrs. bennet was profuse in her acknowledgments.
I often tell my other girls they are nothing to her .
I do not know a place in the country that is equal to netherfield.
At present, however, i consider myself as quite fixed here.
That is exactly what i should have supposed of you, said elizabeth.
You begin to comprehend me, do you?
Cried he, turning towards her.
Yes i understand you perfectly.
That is as it happens.
I did not know before, continued bingley immediately, that you were a studier of character.
It must be an amusing study.
Yes, but intricate characters are the most amusing.
They have at least that advantage.
In a country neighbourhood you move in a very confined and unvarying society.
Yes, indeed, cried mrs. bennet, offended by his manner of mentioning a country neighbourhood.
Everybody was surprised, and darcy, after looking at her for a moment, turned silently away.
Mrs. bennet, who fancied she had gained a complete victory over him, continued her triumph.
The country is a vast deal pleasanter, is it not, mr. bingley?
They have each their advantages, and i can be equally happy in either.
Aye that is because you have the right disposition.
But that gentleman, looking at darcy, seemed to think the country was nothing at all.
Indeed, mamma, you are mistaken, said elizabeth, blushing for her mother.
You quite mistook mr. darcy.
I know we dine with four and twenty families.
Nothing but concern for elizabeth could enable bingley to keep his countenance.
Yes, she called yesterday with her father.
What an agreeable man sir william is, mr. bingley, is not he?
So much the man of fashion!
He has always something to say to everybody.
Did charlotte dine with you?
No, she would go home.
Not that i think charlotte so very plain but then she is our particular friend.
She seems a very pleasant young woman.
Dear, yes but you must own she is very plain.
Lady lucas herself has often said so, and envied me jane's beauty.
It is what everybody says.
I do not trust my own partiality.
But, however, he did not.
Perhaps he thought her too young.
And so ended his affection, said elizabeth impatiently.
There has been many a one, i fancy, overcome in the same way.
I wonder who first discovered the efficacy of poetry in driving away love!
I have been used to consider poetry as the food of love, said darcy.
Of a fine, stout, healthy love it may.
Everything nourishes what is strong already.
Upon this signal, the youngest of her daughters put herself forward.
I shall tell colonel forster it will be quite a shame if he does not.
The loo table, however, did not appear.
Mr. hurst and mr. bingley were at piquet, and mrs. hurst was observing their game.
How delighted miss darcy will be to receive such a letter!
How many letters you must have occasion to write in the course of a year!
How odious i should think them!
It is fortunate, then, that they fall to my lot instead of yours.
Pray tell your sister that i long to see her.
I have already told her so once, by your desire.
Let me mend it for you.
I mend pens remarkably well.
Thank you but i always mend my own.
How can you contrive to write so even?
Will you give me leave to defer your raptures till i write again?
At present i have not room to do them justice.
It is of no consequence.
I shall see her in january.
But do you always write such charming long letters to her, mr. darcy?
They are generally long but whether always charming it is not for me to determine.
He studies too much for words of four syllables.
Cried miss bingley, charles writes in the most careless way imaginable.
He leaves out half his words, and blots the rest.
Your humility, mr. bingley, said elizabeth, must disarm reproof.
Nothing is more deceitful, said darcy, than the appearance of humility.
It is often only carelessness of opinion, and sometimes an indirect boast.
And which of the two do you call my little recent piece of modesty?
You have shown him off now much more than he did himself.
Upon my word, i cannot exactly explain the matter darcy must speak for himself.
To yield readily easily to the persuasion of a friend is no merit with you.
To yield without conviction is no compliment to the understanding of either.
I see your design, bingley, said his friend.
You dislike an argument, and want to silence this.
Arguments are too much like disputes.
Mr. darcy took her advice, and did finish his letter.
The supposition did not pain her.
She liked him too little to care for his approbation.
She smiled, but made no answer.
He repeated the question, with some surprise at her silence.
Indeed i do not dare.
Have you anything else to propose for my domestic felicity?
Put them next to your great uncle the judge.
They are in the same profession, you know, only in different lines.
At that moment they were met from another walk by mrs. hurst and elizabeth herself.
Then taking the disengaged arm of mr. darcy, she left elizabeth to walk by herself.
The path just admitted three.
We had better go into the avenue.
You are charmingly grouped, and appear to uncommon advantage.
The picturesque would be spoilt by admitting a fourth.
Their powers of conversation were considerable.
He was full of joy and attention.
He then sat down by her, and talked scarcely to anyone else.
Elizabeth, at work in the opposite corner, saw it all with great delight.
I declare after all there is no enjoyment like reading!
How much sooner one tires of anything than of a book!
No one made any reply.
I assure you it is very refreshing after sitting so long in one attitude.
Elizabeth was surprised, but agreed to it immediately.
She was dying to know what could be his meaning?
And asked elizabeth whether she could at all understand him?
I never heard anything so abominable.
Nothing so easy, if you have but the inclination, said elizabeth.
Tease him laugh at him.
Intimate as you are, you must know how it is to be done.
But upon my honour, i do not .
I do assure you that my intimacy has not yet taught me that .
Tease calmness of manner and presence of mind!
No, no i feel he may defy us there.
Mr. darcy may hug himself.
Mr. darcy is not to be laughed at!
I dearly love a laugh.
Miss bingley, said he, has given me more credit than can be.
I hope i never ridicule what is wise and good.
But these, i suppose, are precisely what you are without.
Perhaps that is not possible for anyone.
Such as vanity and pride.
Yes, vanity is a weakness indeed.
Elizabeth turned away to hide a smile.
I am perfectly convinced by it that mr. darcy has no defect.
He owns it himself without disguise.
No, said darcy, i have made no such pretension.
I have faults enough, but they are not, i hope, of understanding.
My temper i dare not vouch for.
My feelings are not puffed about with every attempt to move them.
My temper would perhaps be called resentful.
My good opinion once lost, is lost forever.
That is a failing indeed!
Implacable resentment is a shade in a character.
But you have chosen your fault well.
I really cannot laugh at it.
You are safe from me.
And your defect is to hate everybody.
And yours, he replied with a smile, is willfully to misunderstand them.
Louisa, you will not mind my waking mr. hurst?
He began to feel the danger of paying elizabeth too much attention.
To mr. darcy it was welcome intelligence elizabeth had been at netherfield long enough.
On sunday, after morning service, the separation, so agreeable to almost all, took place.
Elizabeth took leave of the whole party in the liveliest of spirits.
They were not welcomed home very cordially by their mother.
Catherine and lydia had information for them of a different sort.
Who do you mean, my dear?
I do not believe she often sees such at home.
The person of whom i speak is a gentleman, and a stranger.
A gentleman and a stranger!
It is mr. bingley, i am sure!
Well, i am sure i shall be extremely glad to see mr. bingley.
There is not a bit of fish to be got to day.
Lydia, my love, ring the bell i must speak to hill this moment.
My dear, cried his wife, i cannot bear to hear that mentioned.
Pray do not talk of that odious man.
Jane and elizabeth tried to explain to her the nature of an entail.
I hate such false friends.
Why could he not keep on quarreling with you, as his father did before him?
He must be an oddity, i think, said she.
I cannot make him out.
There is something very pompous in his style.
And what can he mean by apologising for being next in the entail?
We cannot suppose he would help it if he could.
Could he be a sensible man, sir?
No, my dear, i think not.
I have great hopes of finding him quite the reverse.
There is a mixture of servility and self importance in his letter, which promises well.
I am impatient to see him.
In point of composition, said mary, the letter does not seem defective.
To catherine and lydia, neither the letter nor its writer were in any degree interesting.
He was a tall, heavy looking young man of five and twenty.
His air was grave and stately, and his manners were very formal.
Things are settled so oddly.
You allude, perhaps, to the entail of this estate.
There is no knowing how estates will go when once they come to be entailed.
But i can assure the young ladies that i come prepared to admire them.
They were not the only objects of mr. collins's admiration.
He begged pardon for having displeased her.
Mr. bennet could not have chosen better.
Mr. collins was eloquent in her praise.
It is a pity that great ladies in general are not more like her.
Does she live near you, sir?
I think you said she was a widow, sir?
She has only one daughter, the heiress of rosings, and of very extensive property.
Said mrs. bennet, shaking her head, then she is better off than many girls.
And what sort of young lady is she?
She is a most charming young lady indeed.
Mr. bennet's expectations were fully answered.
Kitty stared at him, and lydia exclaimed.
Other books were produced, and after some deliberation he chose fordyce's sermons.
My aunt told me so herself on saturday.
But i will no longer importune my young cousin.
Then turning to mr. bennet, he offered himself as his antagonist at backgammon.
His plan did not vary on seeing them.
Elizabeth, equally next to jane in birth and beauty, succeeded her of course.
Such doings discomposed mr. bennet exceedingly.
Bingley was the principal spokesman, and miss bennet the principal object.
Both changed colour, one looked white, the other red.
What could be the meaning of it?
It was impossible to imagine it was impossible not to long to know.
The prospect of such delights was very cheering, and they parted in mutual good spirits.
It was over at last, however.
She dared not even mention that gentleman.
Her curiosity, however, was unexpectedly relieved.
Mr. wickham began the subject himself.
Yes, replied mr. wickham his estate there is a noble one.
A clear ten thousand per annum.
Elizabeth could not but look surprised.
Are you much acquainted with mr. darcy?
As much as i ever wish to be, cried elizabeth very warmly.
I am not qualified to form one.
I have known him too long and too well to be a fair judge.
It is impossible for me to be impartial.
Here you are in your own family.
He is not at all liked in hertfordshire.
Everybody is disgusted with his pride.
You will not find him more favourably spoken of by anyone.
I should take him, even on my slight acquaintance, to be an ill tempered man.
Wickham only shook his head.
No it is not for me to be driven away by mr. darcy.
If he wishes to avoid seeing me , he must go.
Society, i own, is necessary to me.
I have been a disappointed man, and my spirits will not bear solitude.
I must have employment and society.
He was my godfather, and excessively attached to me.
I cannot do justice to his kindness.
Cried elizabeth but how could that be?
How could his will be disregarded?
Why did you not seek legal redress?
I can recall nothing worse.
He deserves to be publicly disgraced.
Some time or other he will be but it shall not be by me .
Till i can forget his father, i can never defy or expose him .
But what, said she, after a pause, can have been his motive?
What can have induced him to behave so cruelly?
I had not thought so very ill of him.
His disposition must be dreadful.
He was most highly esteemed by mr. darcy, a most intimate, confidential friend.
It has connected him nearer with virtue than with any other feeling.
Can such abominable pride as his have ever done him good?
What sort of girl is miss darcy?
I wish i could call her amiable.
It gives me pain to speak ill of a darcy.
But she is too much like her brother very, very proud.
But she is nothing to me now.
She is a handsome girl, about fifteen or sixteen, and, i understand, highly accomplished.
How can they suit each other?
Do you know mr. bingley?
He is a sweet tempered, amiable, charming man.
He cannot know what mr. darcy is.
Probably not but mr. darcy can please where he chooses.
He does not want abilities.
He can be a conversible companion if he thinks it worth his while.
The usual inquiries as to his success were made by the latter.
Lady catherine de bourgh, she replied, has very lately given him a living.
No, indeed, i did not.
I knew nothing at all of lady catherine's connections.
I never heard of her existence till the day before yesterday.
This information made elizabeth smile, as she thought of poor miss bingley.
Whatever he said, was said well and whatever he did, done gracefully.
Elizabeth went away with her head full of him.
Interested people have perhaps misrepresented each to the other.
Can his most intimate friends be so excessively deceived in him?
If it be not so, let mr. darcy contradict it.
Besides, there was truth in his looks.
It is difficult indeed it is distressing.
One does not know what to think.
I beg your pardon one knows exactly what to think.
The prospect of the netherfield ball was extremely agreeable to every female of the family.
And even mary could assure her family that she had no disinclination for it.
Elizabeth felt herself completely taken in.
Her liveliness had never been worse timed.
There was no help for it, however.
Attendance, forbearance, patience with darcy, was injury to wickham.
The first two dances, however, brought a return of distress they were dances of mortification.
The moment of her release from him was ecstasy.
That would be the greatest misfortune of all!
To find a man agreeable whom one is determined to hate!
Do not wish me such an evil.
He replied, and was again silent.
He smiled, and assured her that whatever she wished him to say should be said.
That reply will do for the present.
But now we may be silent.
Do you talk by rule, then, while you are dancing?
One must speak a little, you know.
This is no very striking resemblance of your own character, i am sure, said he.
How near it may be to mine , i cannot pretend to say.
You think it a faithful portrait undoubtedly.
I must not decide on my own performance.
Darcy made no answer, and seemed desirous of changing the subject.
I have been most highly gratified indeed, my dear sir.
Such very superior dancing is not often seen.
It is evident that you belong to the first circles.
What congratulations will then flow in!
I appeal to mr. darcy but let me not interrupt you, sir.
I do not think we were speaking at all.
What think you of books?
I am sure we never read the same, or not with the same feelings.
We may compare our different opinions.
The present always occupies you in such scenes does it?
Said he, with a look of doubt.
You are very cautious, i suppose, as to its being created .
I am, said he, with a firm voice.
And never allow yourself to be blinded by prejudice?
May i ask to what these questions tend?
Merely to the illustration of your character, said she, endeavouring to shake off her gravity.
I am trying to make it out.
And what is your success?
I do not get on at all.
I hear such different accounts of you as puzzle me exceedingly.
But if i do not take your likeness now, i may never have another opportunity.
I would by no means suspend any pleasure of yours, he coldly replied.
I beg your pardon, replied miss bingley, turning away with a sneer.
Excuse my interference it was kindly meant.
Mr. bingley does not know mr. wickham himself?
No he never saw him till the other morning at meryton.
This account then is what he has received from mr. darcy.
But what does he say of the living?
How wonderfully these sort of things occur!
My total ignorance of the connection must plead my apology.
You are not going to introduce yourself to mr. darcy!
I shall entreat his pardon for not having done it earlier.
I believe him to be lady catherine's nephew .
It vexed her to see him expose himself to such a man.
Mr. collins then returned to elizabeth.
I have no reason, i assure you, said he, to be dissatisfied with my reception.
Mr. darcy seemed much pleased with the attention.
It was really a very handsome thought.
Upon the whole, i am much pleased with him.
Her mother only scolded her for being nonsensical.
What is mr. darcy to me, pray, that i should be afraid of him?
For heaven's sake, madam, speak lower.
What advantage can it be for you to offend mr. darcy?
You will never recommend yourself to his friend by so doing!
Nothing that she could say, however, had any influence.
Her mother would talk of her views in the same intelligible tone.
Elizabeth blushed and blushed again with shame and vexation.
Elizabeth now began to revive.
You have delighted us long enough.
Let the other young ladies have time to exhibit.
Others of the party were now applied to.
The rector of a parish has much to do.
The rest of the evening brought her little amusement.
There was no arguing upon such a project.
Darcy said nothing at all.
Mr. bennet, in equal silence, was enjoying the scene.
Accompanied by a violent yawn.
Mr. collins made his declaration in form.
Come, kitty, i want you up stairs.
I beg you will not go.
He can have nothing to say to me that anybody need not hear.
I am going away myself.
I desire you to stay where you are.
A clergyman like you must marry.
It was absolutely necessary to interrupt him now.
You are too hasty, sir, she cried.
You forget that i have made no answer.
Let me do it without further loss of time.
Accept my thanks for the compliment you are paying me.
Indeed, mr. collins, all praise of me will be unnecessary.
This matter may be considered, therefore, as finally settled.
Really, mr. collins, cried elizabeth with some warmth, you puzzle me exceedingly.
I would rather be paid the compliment of being believed sincere.
My feelings in every respect forbid it.
But, depend upon it, mr. collins, she added, that lizzy shall be brought to reason.
I will speak to her about it directly.
Sir, you quite misunderstand me, said mrs. bennet, alarmed.
Lizzy is only headstrong in such matters as these.
In everything else she is as good natured a girl as ever lived.
Mr. bennet, you are wanted immediately we are all in an uproar.
Of what are you talking?
Of mr. collins and lizzy.
And what am i to do on the occasion?
It seems an hopeless business.
Speak to lizzy about it yourself.
Tell her that you insist upon her marrying him.
Let her be called down.
She shall hear my opinion.
Mrs. bennet rang the bell, and miss elizabeth was summoned to the library.
Come here, child, cried her father as she appeared.
I have sent for you on an affair of importance.
I understand that mr. collins has made you an offer of marriage.
Elizabeth replied that it was.
Very well and this offer of marriage you have refused?
We now come to the point.
Your mother insists upon your accepting it.
Is it not so, mrs. bennet?
Yes, or i will never see her again.
An unhappy alternative is before you, elizabeth.
From this day you must be a stranger to one of your parents.
What do you mean, mr. bennet, in talking this way?
You promised me to insist upon her marrying him.
My dear, replied her husband, i have two small favours to request.
I shall be glad to have the library to myself as soon as may be.
She talked to elizabeth again and again coaxed and threatened her by turns.
Though her manner varied, however, her determination never did.
Mr. collins, meanwhile, was meditating in solitude on what had passed.
What do you think has happened this morning?
Mr. collins has made an offer to lizzy, and she will not have him.
I am cruelly used, nobody feels for my poor nerves.
Charlotte's reply was spared by the entrance of jane and elizabeth.
I shall not be able to keep you and so i warn you.
I have done with you from this very day.
I have no pleasure in talking to undutiful children.
Not that i have much pleasure, indeed, in talking to anybody.
Nobody can tell what i suffer!
But it is always so.
Those who do not complain are never pitied.
In a doleful voice mrs. bennet began the projected conversation oh!
My dear madam, replied he, let us be for ever silent on this point.
But we are all liable to error.
I have certainly meant well through the whole affair.
The morrow produced no abatement of mrs. bennet's ill humour or ill health.
Mr. collins was also in the same state of angry pride.
He was always to have gone on saturday, and to saturday he meant to stay.
Soon after their return, a letter was delivered to miss bennet it came from netherfield.
You shall hear what she says.
I depend on you for that.
Mr. bingley will not be detained in london by them.
Caroline decidedly says that none of the party will return into hertfordshire this winter.
It is evident by this, added jane, that he comes back no more this winter.
It is only evident that miss bingley does not mean that he should .
Why will you think so?
It must be his own doing.
He is his own master.
But you do not know all .
I will read you the passage which particularly hurts me.
I will have no reserves from you .
What do you think of this sentence, my dear lizzy?
Said jane as she finished it.
Is it not clear enough?
Can there be any other opinion on the subject?
Yes, there can for mine is totally different.
You shall have it in a few words.
Indeed, jane, you ought to believe me.
No one who has ever seen you together can doubt his affection.
Miss bingley, i am sure, cannot.
She is not such a simpleton.
But i know the foundation is unjust.
Believe her to be deceived, by all means.
You have now done your duty by her, and must fret no longer.
How can you talk so?
But if he returns no more this winter, my choice will never be required.
A thousand things may arise in six months!
The idea of his returning no more elizabeth treated with the utmost contempt.
Elizabeth took an opportunity of thanking her.
His reception, however, was of the most flattering kind.
The whole family, in short, were properly overjoyed on the occasion.
Charlotte herself was tolerably composed.
She had gained her point, and had time to consider of it.
Her reflections were in general satisfactory.
But still he would be her husband.
You had better neglect your relations than run the risk of offending your patroness.
You cannot be too much upon your guard.
But on the following morning, every hope of this kind was done away.
I see what you are feeling, replied charlotte.
I am not romantic, you know i never was.
Charlotte the wife of mr. collins was a most humiliating picture!
Sir william, how can you tell such a story?
Do not you know that mr. collins wants to marry lizzy?
Nothing could console and nothing could appease her.
Nor did that day wear out her resentment.
Mr. collins's return into hertfordshire was no longer a matter of pleasure to mrs. bennet.
On the contrary, she was as much disposed to complain of it as her husband.
Neither jane nor elizabeth were comfortable on this subject.
It needed all jane's steady mildness to bear these attacks with tolerable tranquillity.
Mrs. bennet was really in a most pitiable state.
The sight of miss lucas was odious to her.
As her successor in that house, she regarded her with jealous abhorrence.
She complained bitterly of all this to her husband.
My dear, do not give way to such gloomy thoughts.
Let us hope for better things.
Let us flatter ourselves that i may be the survivor.
I cannot bear to think that they should have all this estate.
If it was not for the entail, i should not mind it.
What should not you mind?
I should not mind anything at all.
Let us be thankful that you are preserved from a state of such insensibility.
I never can be thankful, mr. bennet, for anything about the entail.
Why should he have it more than anybody else?
I leave it to yourself to determine, said mr. bennet.
Miss darcy's praise occupied the chief of it.
Her heart was divided between concern for her sister, and resentment against all others.
To caroline's assertion of her brother's being partial to miss darcy she paid no credit.
But i will not repine.
He will be forgot, and we shall all be as we were before.
Elizabeth looked at her sister with incredulous solicitude, but said nothing.
You doubt me, cried jane, slightly colouring indeed, you have no reason.
I have nothing either to hope or fear, and nothing to reproach him with.
I have not that pain.
A little time, therefore i shall certainly try to get the better.
Exclaimed elizabeth, you are too good.
Nay, said elizabeth, this is not fair.
In every view it is unaccountable!
My dear lizzy, do not give way to such feelings as these.
They will ruin your happiness.
You do not make allowance enough for difference of situation and temper.
Consider mr. collins's respectability, and charlotte's steady, prudent character.
You shall not defend her, though it is charlotte lucas.
You alluded to something else.
We must not be so ready to fancy ourselves intentionally injured.
We must not expect a lively young man to be always so guarded and circumspect.
It is very often nothing but our own vanity that deceives us.
Women fancy admiration means more than it does.
And men take care that they should.
And do you impute it to either of those?
Stop me whilst you can.
You persist, then, in supposing his sisters influence him?
Yes, in conjunction with his friend.
Why should they try to influence him?
Your first position is false.
Do not distress me by the idea.
Mrs. bennet's best comfort was that mr. bingley must be down again in the summer.
Mr. bennet treated the matter differently.
So, lizzy, said he one day, your sister is crossed in love, i find.
When is your turn to come?
You will hardly bear to be long outdone by jane.
Here are officers enough in meryton to disappoint all the young ladies in the country.
Let wickham be your man.
He is a pleasant fellow, and would jilt you creditably.
Thank you, sir, but a less agreeable man would satisfy me.
We must not all expect jane's good fortune.
Between the two eldest and herself especially, there subsisted a particular regard.
They had frequently been staying with her in town.
When this was done she had a less active part to play.
It became her turn to listen.
Mrs. bennet had many grievances to relate, and much to complain of.
They had all been very ill used since she last saw her sister.
He made her an offer in this very room, and she refused him.
The lucases are very artful people indeed, sister.
They are all for what they can get.
I am sorry to say it of them, but so it is.
When alone with elizabeth afterwards, she spoke more on the subject.
It seems likely to have been a desirable match for jane, said she.
I am sorry it went off.
But these things happen so often!
We do not suffer by accident .
Pray, how violent was mr. bingley's love?
Every time they met, it was more decided and remarkable.
Could there be finer symptoms?
Is not general incivility the very essence of love?
Of that kind of love which i suppose him to have felt.
But do you think she would be prevailed upon to go back with us?
Elizabeth was exceedingly pleased with this proposal, and felt persuaded of her sister's ready acquiescence.
My dear aunt, how could you think of it?
I hope they will not meet at all.
But does not jane correspond with his sister?
She will not be able to help calling.
She will drop the acquaintance entirely.
To mrs. gardiner, wickham had one means of affording pleasure, unconnected with his general powers.
Mrs. gardiner had seen pemberley, and known the late mr. darcy by character perfectly well.
Here consequently was an inexhaustible subject of discourse.
Seriously, i would have you be on your guard.
But as it is, you must not let your fancy run away with you.
You have sense, and we all expect you to use it.
Your father would depend on your resolution and good conduct, i am sure.
You must not disappoint your father.
My dear aunt, this is being serious indeed.
Yes, and i hope to engage you to be serious likewise.
Well, then, you need not be under any alarm.
I will take care of myself, and of mr. wickham too.
He shall not be in love with me, if i can prevent it.
Elizabeth, you are not serious now.
I beg your pardon, i will try again.
At present i am not in love with mr. wickham no, i certainly am not.
I see the imprudence of it.
My father, however, is partial to mr. wickham.
All that i can promise you, therefore, is not to be in a hurry.
I will not be in a hurry to believe myself his first object.
When i am in company with him, i will not be wishing.
In short, i will do my best.
Perhaps it will be as well if you discourage his coming here so very often.
At least, you should not remind your mother of inviting him.
But do not imagine that he is always here so often.
It is on your account that he has been so frequently invited this week.
You know my mother's ideas as to the necessity of constant company for her friends.
And i have another favour to ask you.
Will you come and see me?
We shall often meet, i hope, in hertfordshire.
I am not likely to leave kent for some time.
Promise me, therefore, to come to hunsford.
Elizabeth could not refuse, though she foresaw little pleasure in the visit.
Indeed, eliza, you will be as welcome as either of them.
She wrote cheerfully, seemed surrounded with comforts, and mentioned nothing which she could not praise.
Her impatience for this second letter was as well rewarded as impatience generally is.
Jane had been a week in town without either seeing or hearing from caroline.
She wrote again when the visit was paid, and she had seen miss bingley.
I was right, therefore, my last letter had never reached her.
I inquired after their brother, of course.
I found that miss darcy was expected to dinner.
I wish i could see her.
My visit was not long, as caroline and mrs. hurst were going out.
I dare say i shall see them soon here.
Elizabeth shook her head over this letter.
Four weeks passed away, and jane saw nothing of him.
I pity, though i cannot help blaming her.
Let me hear from you very soon.
We had better not mention it.
I am extremely glad that you have such pleasant accounts from our friends at hunsford.
Pray go to see them, with sir william and maria.
I am sure you will be very comfortable there.
All expectation from the brother was now absolutely over.
She would not even wish for a renewal of his attentions.
There can be no love in all this.
Importance may sometimes be purchased too dearly.
Kitty and lydia take his defection much more to heart than i do.
March was to take elizabeth to hunsford.
Everything, however, went on smoothly, and was finally settled according to charlotte's first sketch.
She was to accompany sir william and his second daughter.
The farewell between herself and mr. wickham was perfectly friendly on his side even more.
Elizabeth loved absurdities, but she had known sir william's too long.
All was joy and kindness.
Elizabeth then contrived to sit by her aunt.
It was reasonable, however, to hope that they would not continue long.
But my dear elizabeth, she added, what sort of girl is miss king?
I should be sorry to think our friend mercenary.
Where does discretion end, and avarice begin?
She is a very good kind of girl, i believe.
I know no harm of her.
If she does not object to it, why should we ?
Her not objecting does not justify him .
It only shows her being deficient in something herself sense or feeling.
Well, cried elizabeth, have it as you choose.
He shall be mercenary, and she shall be foolish.
No, lizzy, that is what i do not choose.
I am sick of them all.
Stupid men are the only ones worth knowing, after all.
Take care, lizzy that speech savours strongly of disappointment.
Oh, my dear, dear aunt, she rapturously cried, what delight!
You give me fresh life and vigour.
Adieu to disappointment and spleen.
What are young men to rocks and mountains?
What hours of transport we shall spend!
We will know where we have gone we will recollect what we have seen.
Let our first effusions be less insupportable than those of the generality of travellers.
The palings of rosings park was their boundary on one side.
Elizabeth smiled at the recollection of all that she had heard of its inhabitants.
At length the parsonage was discernible.
It was a handsome modern building, well situated on rising ground.
She had already learnt that lady catherine was still in the country.
Her behaviour to my dear charlotte is charming.
We dine at rosings twice every week, and are never allowed to walk home.
Her ladyship's carriage is regularly ordered for us.
I should say, one of her ladyship's carriages, for she has several.
Very true, my dear, that is exactly what i say.
She is the sort of woman whom one cannot regard with too much deference.
A lively imagination soon settled it all.
I will not tell you what it is.
Make haste, and come down this moment.
My dear, said maria, quite shocked at the mistake, it is not lady catherine.
She is quite a little creature.
Who would have thought that she could be so thin and small?
She is abominably rude to keep charlotte out of doors in all this wind.
Why does she not come in?
Oh, charlotte says she hardly ever does.
It is the greatest of favours when miss de bourgh comes in.
I like her appearance, said elizabeth, struck with other ideas.
She looks sickly and cross.
Yes, she will do for him very well.
She will make him a very proper wife.
I rather expected, from my knowledge of her affability, that it would happen.
But who could have foreseen such an attention as this?
About the court, such instances of elegant breeding are not uncommon.
Lady catherine will not think the worse of you for being simply dressed.
She likes to have the distinction of rank preserved.
Elizabeth's courage did not fail her.
There was neither in figure nor face any likeness between the ladies.
The party did not supply much conversation.
Elizabeth felt all the impertinence of her questions but answered them very composedly.
Lady catherine then observed, your father's estate is entailed on mr. collins, i think.
It was not thought necessary in sir lewis de bourgh's family.
Do you play and sing, miss bennet?
Then some time or other we shall be happy to hear you.
Our instrument is a capital one, probably superior to you shall try it some day.
Do your sisters play and sing?
Why did not you all learn?
You ought all to have learned.
But i suppose you had no opportunity.
Your mother should have taken you to town every spring for the benefit of masters.
My mother would have had no objection, but my father hates london.
Has your governess left you?
We never had any governess.
Five daughters brought up at home without a governess!
I never heard of such a thing.
Your mother must have been quite a slave to your education.
Elizabeth could hardly help smiling as she assured her that had not been the case.
Without a governess, you must have been neglected.
We were always encouraged to read, and had all the masters that were necessary.
Those who chose to be idle, certainly might.
I am always glad to get a young person well placed out.
Mrs. collins, did i tell you of lady metcalf's calling yesterday to thank me?
She finds miss pope a treasure.
Lady catherine,' said she, 'you have given me a treasure.
Are any of your younger sisters out, miss bennet?
What, all five out at once?
And you only the second.
The younger ones out before the elder ones are married!
Your younger sisters must be very young?
Yes, my youngest is not sixteen.
Perhaps she is full young to be much in company.
And to be kept back on such a motive!
Pray, what is your age?
I am not one and twenty.
When the gentlemen had joined them, and tea was over, the card tables were placed.
Their table was superlatively stupid.
A great deal more passed at the other table.
Sir william did not say much.
He was storing his memory with anecdotes and noble names.
The room in which the ladies sat was backwards.
In this quiet way, the first fortnight of her visit soon passed away.
On the following morning he hastened to rosings to pay his respects.
Mr. darcy would never have come so soon to wait upon me.
Elizabeth merely curtseyed to him without saying a word.
Have you never happened to see her there?
The subject was pursued no farther, and the gentlemen soon afterwards went away.
For the last week they had seen very little of lady catherine or her daughter.
What is it you are talking of?
What are you telling miss bennet?
Let me hear what it is.
It is of all subjects my delight.
I must have my share in the conversation if you are speaking of music.
If i had ever learnt, i should have been a great proficient.
And so would anne, if her health had allowed her to apply.
I am confident that she would have performed delightfully.
How does georgiana get on, darcy?
Mr. darcy spoke with affectionate praise of his sister's proficiency.
I assure you, madam, he replied, that she does not need such advice.
She would be in nobody's way, you know, in that part of the house.
Mr. darcy looked a little ashamed of his aunt's ill breeding, and made no answer.
He drew a chair near her.
I will not be alarmed though your sister does play so well.
My courage always rises at every attempt to intimidate me.
I am not afraid of you, said he, smilingly.
Pray let me hear what you have to accuse him of, cried colonel fitzwilliam.
You shall hear then but prepare yourself for something very dreadful.
Mr. darcy, you cannot deny the fact.
True and nobody can ever be introduced in a ball room.
Well, colonel fitzwilliam, what do i play next?
My fingers wait your orders.
Shall we ask your cousin the reason of this?
Said elizabeth, still addressing colonel fitzwilliam.
I can answer your question, said fitzwilliam, without applying to him.
It is because he will not give himself the trouble.
Darcy smiled and said, you are perfectly right.
You have employed your time much better.
No one admitted to the privilege of hearing you can think anything wanting.
We neither of us perform to strangers.
Elizabeth immediately began playing again.
Anne would have been a delightful performer, had her health allowed her to learn.
He and his sisters were well, i hope, when you left london?
Perfectly so, i thank you.
He took the hint, and soon began with, this seems a very comfortable house.
Mr. collins appears to be very fortunate in his choice of a wife.
An easy distance, do you call it?
It is nearly fifty miles.
And what is fifty miles of good road?
Little more than half a day's journey.
Yes, i call it a very easy distance.
I should never have said mrs. collins was settled near her family.
It is a proof of your own attachment to hertfordshire.
Anything beyond the very neighbourhood of longbourn, i suppose, would appear far.
The far and the near must be relative, and depend on many varying circumstances.
Where there is fortune to make the expenses of travelling unimportant, distance becomes no evil.
But that is not the case here .
You cannot have been always at longbourn.
The tete a tete surprised them.
What can be the meaning of this?
Said charlotte, as soon as he was gone.
All field sports were over.
He seldom appeared really animated.
Mrs. collins knew not what to make of him.
In her kind schemes for elizabeth, she sometimes planned her marrying colonel fitzwilliam.
How it could occur a second time, therefore, was very odd!
Yet it did, and even a third.
His words seemed to imply it.
Could he have colonel fitzwilliam in his thoughts?
Are you going much farther?
No, i should have turned in a moment.
And accordingly she did turn, and they walked towards the parsonage together.
Do you certainly leave kent on saturday?
Yes if darcy does not put it off again.
But i am at his disposal.
He arranges the business just as he pleases.
He likes to have his own way very well, replied colonel fitzwilliam.
But so we all do.
A younger son, you know, must be inured to self denial and dependence.
In my opinion, the younger son of an earl can know very little of either.
Now seriously, what have you ever known of self denial and dependence?
But in matters of greater weight, i may suffer from want of money.
Younger sons cannot marry where they like.
Unless where they like women of fortune, which i think they very often do.
Is this, thought elizabeth, meant for me?
He answered her in the same style, and the subject dropped.
I wonder he does not marry, to secure a lasting convenience of that kind.
No, said colonel fitzwilliam, that is an advantage which he must divide with me.
I am joined with him in the guardianship of miss darcy.
And pray what sort of guardians do you make?
Does your charge give you much trouble?
She directly replied you need not be frightened.
I think i have heard you say that you know them.
I know them a little.
Their brother is a pleasant gentlemanlike man he is a great friend of darcy's.
What is it you mean?
You may depend upon my not mentioning it.
And remember that i have not much reason for supposing it to be bingley.
Did mr. darcy give you reasons for this interference?
I understood that there were some very strong objections against the lady.
And what arts did he use to separate them?
He did not talk to me of his own arts, said fitzwilliam, smiling.
He only told me what i have now told you.
Elizabeth made no answer, and walked on, her heart swelling with indignation.
After watching her a little, fitzwilliam asked her why she was so thoughtful.
I am thinking of what you have been telling me, said she.
Your cousin's conduct does not suit my feelings.
Why was he to be the judge?
You are rather disposed to call his interference officious?
It is not to be supposed that there was much affection in the case.
Her understanding excellent, her mind improved, and her manners captivating.
She answered him with cold civility.
He sat down for a few moments, and then getting up, walked about the room.
Elizabeth was surprised, but said not a word.
My feelings will not be repressed.
You must allow me to tell you how ardently i admire and love you.
Elizabeth's astonishment was beyond expression.
She stared, coloured, doubted, and was silent.
He spoke of apprehension and anxiety, but his countenance expressed real security.
I am sorry to have occasioned pain to anyone.
It has been most unconsciously done, however, and i hope will be of short duration.
The pause was to elizabeth's feelings dreadful.
But it is of small importance.
Was not this some excuse for incivility, if i was uncivil?
But i have other provocations.
No motive can excuse the unjust and ungenerous part you acted there .
He even looked at her with a smile of affected incredulity.
Can you deny that you have done it?
Towards him i have been kinder than towards myself.
But it is not merely this affair, she continued, on which my dislike is founded.
Long before it had taken place my opinion of you was decided.
On this subject, what can you have to say?
In what imaginary act of friendship can you here defend yourself?
Or under what misrepresentation can you here impose upon others?
Who that knows what his misfortunes have been, can help feeling an interest in him?
Repeated darcy contemptuously yes, his misfortunes have been great indeed.
And of your infliction, cried elizabeth with energy.
You have reduced him to his present state of poverty comparative poverty.
You have withheld the advantages which you must know to have been designed for him.
You have done all this!
And yet you can treat the mention of his misfortune with contempt and ridicule.
This is the estimation in which you hold me!
I thank you for explaining it so fully.
My faults, according to this calculation, are heavy indeed!
But disguise of every sort is my abhorrence.
Nor am i ashamed of the feelings i related.
They were natural and just.
Could you expect me to rejoice in the inferiority of your connections?
You have said quite enough, madam.
The tumult of her mind, was now painfully great.
That she should receive an offer of marriage from mr. darcy!
That he should have been in love with her for so many months!
It was gratifying to have inspired unconsciously so strong an affection.
Will you do me the honour of reading that letter?
The envelope itself was likewise full.
Pursuing her way along the lane, she then began it.
The necessity must be obeyed, and further apology would be absurd.
I had often seen him in love before.
Your sister i also watched.
If you have not been mistaken here, i must have been in error.
Your superior knowledge of your sister must make the latter probable.
These causes must be stated, though briefly.
It pains me to offend you.
The part which i acted is now to be explained.
I described, and enforced them earnestly.
To convince him, therefore, that he had deceived himself, was no very difficult point.
I cannot blame myself for having done thus much.
On this subject i have nothing more to say, no other apology to offer.
Here again i shall give you pain to what degree you only can tell.
There was also a legacy of one thousand pounds.
All connection between us seemed now dissolved.
After this period every appearance of acquaintance was dropped.
How he lived i know not.
But last summer he was again most painfully obtruded on my notice.
Having said thus much, i feel no doubt of your secrecy.
You may imagine what i felt and how i acted.
His revenge would have been complete indeed.
I will only add, god bless you.
Her feelings as she read were scarcely to be defined.
It was all pride and insolence.
Astonishment, apprehension, and even horror, oppressed her.
She wished to discredit it entirely, repeatedly exclaiming, this must be false!
This must be the grossest falsehood!
On both sides it was only assertion.
But no such recollection befriended her.
After pausing on this point a considerable while, she once more continued to read.
Many of his expressions were still fresh in her memory.
How differently did everything now appear in which he was concerned!
She grew absolutely ashamed of herself.
How despicably i have acted!
She cried i, who have prided myself on my discernment!
I, who have valued myself on my abilities!
How humiliating is this discovery!
Yet, how just a humiliation!
Had i been in love, i could not have been more wretchedly blind!
But vanity, not love, has been my folly.
Till this moment i never knew myself.
Widely different was the effect of a second perusal.
Neither could she deny the justice of his description of jane.
The compliment to herself and her sister was not unfelt.
Elizabeth could but just affect concern in missing him she really rejoiced at it.
Colonel fitzwilliam was no longer an object she could think only of her letter.
What would she have said?
How would she have behaved?
Were questions with which she amused herself.
Their first subject was the diminution of the rosings party.
They were excessively sorry to go!
But so they always are.
His attachment to rosings certainly increases.
Mrs. collins will be very glad of your company, i am sure.
I must be in town next saturday.
Why, at that rate, you will have been here only six weeks.
I expected you to stay two months.
There can be no occasion for your going so soon.
Mrs. bennet could certainly spare you for another fortnight.
He wrote last week to hurry my return.
Your father of course may spare you, if your mother can.
Daughters are never of so much consequence to a father.
You are all kindness, madam but i believe we must abide by our original plan.
Mrs. collins, you must send a servant with them.
You must contrive to send somebody.
I have the greatest dislike in the world to that sort of thing.
Young women should always be properly guarded and attended, according to their situation in life.
I am excessively attentive to all those things.
My uncle is to send a servant for us.
He keeps a man servant, does he?
I am very glad you have somebody who thinks of these things.
Where shall you change horses?
If you mention my name at the bell, you will be attended to.
Mr. darcy's letter she was in a fair way of soon knowing by heart.
She studied every sentence and her feelings towards its writer were at times widely different.
They were hopeless of remedy.
They were ignorant, idle, and vain.
The favour of your company has been much felt, i assure you.
We know how little there is to tempt anyone to our humble abode.
Elizabeth was eager with her thanks and assurances of happiness.
You see on what a footing we are.
You see how continually we are engaged there.
I flatter myself at least that you will be able to do so.
My dear charlotte and i have but one mind and one way of thinking.
There is in everything a most remarkable resemblance of character and ideas between us.
We seem to have been designed for each other.
It was melancholy to leave her to such society!
And yet how many things have happened!
A great many indeed, said her companion with a sigh.
We have dined nine times at rosings, besides drinking tea there twice!
How much i shall have to tell!
Elizabeth added privately, and how much i shall have to conceal!
Is not this an agreeable surprise?
Then, showing her purchases look here, i have bought this bonnet.
And when her sisters abused it as ugly, she added, with perfect unconcern, oh!
Cried elizabeth, with the greatest satisfaction.
Mamma would like to go too of all things!
Only think what a miserable summer else we shall have!
It is excellent news capital news and about a certain person we all like!
Lydia laughed, and said aye, that is just like your formality and discretion.
You thought the waiter must not hear, as if he cared!
I dare say he often hears worse things said than i am going to say.
But he is an ugly fellow!
I am glad he is gone.
I never saw such a long chin in my life.
There is no danger of wickham's marrying mary king.
She is gone down to her uncle at liverpool gone to stay.
And mary king is safe!
Added elizabeth safe from a connection imprudent as to fortune.
She is a great fool for going away, if she liked him.
But i hope there is no strong attachment on either side, said jane.
I am sure there is not on his .
How nicely we are all crammed in, cried lydia.
Have you seen any pleasant men?
Have you had any flirting?
Jane will be quite an old maid soon, i declare.
She is almost three and twenty!
Lord, how ashamed i should be of not being married before three and twenty!
My aunt phillips wants you so to get husbands, you can't think.
We had such a good piece of fun the other day at colonel forster's.
And so did mrs. forster.
I thought i should have died.
Their reception at home was most kind.
Mary, said she, i wish you had gone with us, for we had such fun!
And then when we came away it was such fun!
I thought we never should have got into the coach.
I was ready to die of laughter.
And then we were so merry all the way home!
We talked and laughed so loud, that anybody might have heard us ten miles off!
They would doubtless be congenial with the generality of female minds.
But of this answer lydia heard not a word.
There was another reason too for her opposition.
The comfort to her of the regiment's approaching removal was indeed beyond expression.
You do not blame me, however, for refusing him?
But you blame me for having spoken so warmly of wickham?
No i do not know that you were wrong in saying what you did.
But you will know it, when i tell you what happened the very next day.
What a stroke was this for poor jane!
Take your choice, but you must be satisfied with only one.
It was some time, however, before a smile could be extorted from jane.
I do not know when i have been more shocked, said she.
It is almost past belief.
Dear lizzy, only consider what he must have suffered.
And with the knowledge of your ill opinion, too!
And having to relate such a thing of his sister!
It is really too distressing.
I am sure you must feel it so.
There is such an expression of goodness in his countenance!
Such an openness and gentleness in his manner!
There certainly was some great mismanagement in the education of those two young men.
One has got all the goodness, and the other all the appearance of it.
I was uncomfortable enough, i may say unhappy.
There is one point on which i want your advice.
That it ought not to be attempted.
Mr. darcy has not authorised me to make his communication public.
I am not equal to it.
At present i will say nothing about it.
To have his errors made public might ruin him for ever.
We must not make him desperate.
The tumult of elizabeth's mind was allayed by this conversation.
But there was still something lurking behind, of which prudence forbade the disclosure.
The liberty of communication cannot be mine till it has lost all its value!
She still cherished a very tender affection for bingley.
For my part, i am determined never to speak of it again to anybody.
I told my sister phillips so the other day.
But i cannot find out that jane saw anything of him in london.
I do not believe he will ever live at netherfield any more.
It is just as he chooses.
Nobody wants him to come.
But as elizabeth could not receive comfort from any such expectation, she made no answer.
Well, well, i only hope it will last.
And what sort of table do they keep?
Charlotte is an excellent manager, i dare say.
If she is half as sharp as her mother, she is saving enough.
There is nothing extravagant in their housekeeping, i dare say.
A great deal of good management, depend upon it.
Yes, yes, they will take care not to outrun their income.
They will never be distressed for money.
Well, much good may it do them!
And so, i suppose, they often talk of having longbourn when your father is dead.
They look upon it as quite their own, i dare say, whenever that happens.
It was a subject which they could not mention before me.
I should be ashamed of having one that was only entailed on me.
The dejection was almost universal.
What is to become of us?
What are we to do?
Would they often exclaim in the bitterness of woe.
How can you be smiling so, lizzy?
I thought i should have broken my heart.
I am sure i shall break mine , said lydia.
If one could but go to brighton!
But papa is so disagreeable.
A little sea bathing would set me up forever.
Such were the kind of lamentations resounding perpetually through longbourn house.
This invaluable friend was a very young woman, and very lately married.
In vain did elizabeth attempt to make her reasonable, and jane to make her resigned.
What, has she frightened away some of your lovers?
But do not be cast down.
I have no such injuries to resent.
It is not of particular, but of general evils, which i am now complaining.
Excuse me, for i must speak plainly.
In this danger kitty also is comprehended.
She will follow wherever lydia leads.
Vain, ignorant, idle, and absolutely uncontrolled!
The officers will find women better worth their notice.
Let us hope, therefore, that her being there may teach her her own insignificance.
It was not in her nature, however, to increase her vexations by dwelling on them.
In lydia's imagination, a visit to brighton comprised every possibility of earthly happiness.
Elizabeth was now to see mr. wickham for the last time.
Her answer was warmly in his favour.
And you saw him frequently?
His manners are very different from his cousin's.
But i think mr. darcy improves upon acquaintance.
Cried mr. wickham with a look which did not escape her.
And pray, may i ask?
Has he deigned to add aught of civility to his ordinary style?
In essentials, i believe, he is very much what he ever was.
The separation between her and her family was rather noisy than pathetic.
But it is fortunate, thought she, that i have something to wish for.
Were the whole arrangement complete, my disappointment would be certain.
Everything wore a happier aspect.
With the mention of derbyshire there were many ideas connected.
The period of expectation was now doubled.
Four weeks were to pass away before her uncle and aunt's arrival.
A small part of derbyshire is all the present concern.
Mr. gardiner declared his willingness, and elizabeth was applied to for her approbation.
Said her aunt a place, too, with which so many of your acquaintances are connected.
Wickham passed all his youth there, you know.
Mrs. gardiner abused her stupidity.
They have some of the finest woods in the country.
Elizabeth said no more but her mind could not acquiesce.
The possibility of meeting mr. darcy, while viewing the place, instantly occurred.
What was the name of its proprietor?
And, with no little alarm, whether the family were down for the summer?
To pemberley, therefore, they were to go.
The park was very large, and contained great variety of ground.
Its banks were neither formal nor falsely adorned.
She dreaded lest the chambermaid had been mistaken.
They followed her into the dining parlour.
It was a large, well proportioned room, handsomely fitted up.
Elizabeth, after slightly surveying it, went to a window to enjoy its prospect.
And of this place, thought she, i might have been mistress!
With these rooms i might now have been familiarly acquainted!
This was a lucky recollection it saved her from something very like regret.
Her aunt now called her to look at a picture.
Her aunt asked her, smilingly, how she liked it.
Mrs. gardiner looked at her niece with a smile, but elizabeth could not return it.
It was drawn at the same time as the other about eight years ago.
But, lizzy, you can tell us whether it is like or not.
Does that young lady know mr. darcy?
Elizabeth coloured, and said a little.
And do not you think him a very handsome gentleman, ma'am?
He was very fond of them.
This accounted to elizabeth for mr. wickham's being among them.
And is miss darcy as handsome as her brother?
Yes the handsomest young lady that ever was seen and so accomplished!
She plays and sings all day long.
Is your master much at pemberley in the course of the year?
Except, thought elizabeth, when she goes to ramsgate.
If your master would marry, you might see more of him.
Yes, sir but i do not know when that will be.
I do not know who is good enough for him.
Mr. and mrs. gardiner smiled.
This was praise, of all others most extraordinary, most opposite to her ideas.
You are lucky in having such a master.
Yes, sir, i know i am.
If i were to go through the world, i could not meet with a better.
Elizabeth almost stared at her.
Can this be mr. darcy?
His father was an excellent man, said mrs. gardiner.
Elizabeth listened, wondered, doubted, and was impatient for more.
Mrs. reynolds could interest her on no other point.
Some people call him proud but i am sure i never saw anything of it.
In what an amiable light does this place him!
Perhaps we might be deceived.
That is not very likely our authority was too good.
Mrs. reynolds anticipated miss darcy's delight, when she should enter the room.
And this is always the way with him, she added.
Whatever can give his sister any pleasure is sure to be done in a moment.
There is nothing he would not do for her.
Elizabeth walked in quest of the only face whose features would be known to her.
Mrs. reynolds informed them that it had been taken in his father's lifetime.
The commendation bestowed on him by mrs. reynolds was of no trifling nature.
What praise is more valuable than the praise of an intelligent servant?
How much of pleasure or pain was it in his power to bestow!
How much of good or evil must be done by him!
Their eyes instantly met, and the cheeks of both were overspread with the deepest blush.
She was overpowered by shame and vexation.
Her coming there was the most unfortunate, the most ill judged thing in the world!
How strange it must appear to him!
In what a disgraceful light might it not strike so vain a man!
It might seem as if she had purposely thrown herself in his way again!
Or, why did he thus come a day before he was expected?
She blushed again and again over the perverseness of the meeting.
And his behaviour, so strikingly altered what could it mean?
That he should even speak to her was amazing!
But to speak with such civility, to inquire after her family!
She knew not what to think, or how to account for it.
With a triumphant smile they were told that it was ten miles round.
Her colour changed, and she said no more.
What will be his surprise, thought she, when he knows who they are?
He takes them now for people of fashion.
Elizabeth could not but be pleased, could not but triumph.
Elizabeth said nothing, but it gratified her exceedingly the compliment must be all for herself.
Her astonishment, however, was extreme, and continually was she repeating, why is he so altered?
From what can it proceed?
My reproofs at hunsford could not work such a change as this.
It is impossible that he should still love me.
Mr. darcy took her place by her niece, and they walked on together.
After a short silence, the lady first spoke.
Elizabeth answered only by a slight bow.
They now walked on in silence, each of them deep in thought.
Elizabeth was not comfortable that was impossible but she was flattered and pleased.
His wish of introducing his sister to her was a compliment of the highest kind.
At such a time much might have been said, and silence was very awkward.
She wanted to talk, but there seemed to be an embargo on every subject.
He is perfectly well behaved, polite, and unassuming, said her uncle.
I was never more surprised than by his behaviour to us.
His acquaintance with elizabeth was very trifling.
But how came you to tell me that he was so disagreeable?
But perhaps he may be a little whimsical in his civilities, replied her uncle.
Elizabeth felt that they had entirely misunderstood his character, but said nothing.
He has not an ill natured look.
On the contrary, there is something pleasing about his mouth when he speaks.
I could hardly help laughing aloud sometimes.
Miss darcy and her brother appeared, and this formidable introduction took place.
She found it difficult to obtain even a word from her beyond a monosyllable.
To mr. and mrs. gardiner he was scarcely a less interesting personage than to herself.
They had long wished to see him.
The whole party before them, indeed, excited a lively attention.
Elizabeth, on her side, had much to do.
Bingley was ready, georgiana was eager, and darcy determined, to be pleased.
In seeing bingley, her thoughts naturally flew to her sister and, oh!
No look appeared on either side that spoke particular regard.
Nothing occurred between them that could justify the hopes of his sister.
They saw much to interest, but nothing to justify inquiry.
She certainly did not hate him.
They were, therefore, to go.
Mr. gardiner left them soon after breakfast.
Mrs. gardiner and her niece, however, did her justice, and pitied her.
Her own thoughts were employing her.
She expected every moment that some of the gentlemen would enter the room.
She answered with equal indifference and brevity, and the other said no more.
They must be a great loss to your family.
Not a syllable had ever reached her of miss darcy's meditated elopement.
But georgiana would not join her.
Her brother's recommendation was enough to ensure her favour his judgement could not err.
She is grown so brown and coarse!
Louisa and i were agreeing that we should not have known her again.
Her nose wants character there is nothing marked in its lines.
Elizabeth was not surprised at it, as jane had written the direction remarkably ill.
The one missent must first be attended to it had been written five days ago.
What i have to say relates to poor lydia.
To kitty, however, it does not seem so wholly unexpected.
I am very, very sorry.
So imprudent a match on both sides!
But i am willing to hope the best, and that his character has been misunderstood.
Our poor mother is sadly grieved.
My father bears it better.
The express was sent off directly.
My dear lizzy, they must have passed within ten miles of us.
Colonel forster gives us reason to expect him here soon.
Lydia left a few lines for his wife, informing her of their intention.
I must conclude, for i cannot be long from my poor mother.
I know not what to think.
Our distress, my dear lizzy, is very great.
My father and mother believe the worst, but i cannot think so ill of him.
My poor mother is really ill, and keeps her room.
Could she exert herself, it would be better but this is not to be expected.
And as to my father, i never in my life saw him so affected.
I am not so selfish, however, as to press for it, if inconvenient.
My father is going to london with colonel forster instantly, to try to discover her.
Where, where is my uncle?
You are not well enough you cannot go yourself.
Is there nothing you could take to give you present relief?
A glass of wine shall i get you one?
You are very ill. no, i thank you, she replied, endeavouring to recover herself.
There is nothing the matter with me.
At length she spoke again.
I have just had a letter from jane, with such dreadful news.
It cannot be concealed from anyone.
They are gone off together from brighton.
You know him too well to doubt the rest.
Darcy was fixed in astonishment.
I, who knew what he was.
Had his character been known, this could not have happened.
But it is all all too late now.
I am grieved indeed, cried darcy grieved shocked.
But is it certain absolutely certain?
And what has been done, what has been attempted, to recover her?
But nothing can be done i know very well that nothing can be done.
How is such a man to be worked on?
How are they even to be discovered?
I have not the smallest hope.
It is every way horrible!
Darcy shook his head in silent acquiescence.
When my eyes were opened to his real character oh!
Had i known what i ought, what i dared to do!
But i knew not i was afraid of doing too much.
Elizabeth soon observed, and instantly understood it.
But self, though it would intrude, could not engross her.
Be so kind as to apologise for us to miss darcy.
Say that urgent business calls us home immediately.
No one but jane, she thought, could flatter herself with such an expectation.
Surprise was the least of her feelings on this development.
But now it was all too natural.
Her affections had continually been fluctuating but never without an object.
The mischief of neglect and mistaken indulgence towards such a girl oh!
How acutely did she now feel it!
They were to be off as soon as possible.
But what is to be done about pemberley?
John told us mr. darcy was here when you sent for us was it so?
Yes and i told him we should not be able to keep our engagement.
Repeated the other, as she ran into her room to prepare.
And are they upon such terms as for her to disclose the real truth?
Oh, that i knew how it was!
Could he expect that her friends would not step forward?
His temptation is not adequate to the risk!
Cried elizabeth, brightening up for a moment.
Upon my word, said mrs. gardiner, i begin to be of your uncle's opinion.
I cannot think so very ill of wickham.
If, indeed, it should be so!
But i dare not hope it.
Why should they not go on to scotland if that had been the case?
But their removing from the chaise into a hackney coach is such a presumption!
Well, then supposing them to be in london.
They may be there, though for the purpose of concealment, for no more exceptional purpose.
Why any fear of detection?
Why must their marriage be private?
Oh, no, no this is not likely.
Wickham will never marry a woman without some money.
But as to your other objection, i am afraid it will hardly hold good.
But, really, i know not what to say.
Perhaps i am not doing her justice.
Susceptibility to her feelings which are naturally lively enough.
Of whom does jane ever think ill?
But jane knows, as well as i do, what wickham really is.
And do you really know all this?
Cried mrs. gardiner, whose curiosity as to the mode of her intelligence was all alive.
I do indeed, replied elizabeth, colouring.
Yet he knew to the contrary himself.
He must know that she was as amiable and unpretending as we have found her.
But does lydia know nothing of this?
Can she be ignorant of what you and jane seem so well to understand?
That, that is the worst of all.
That she could be in any danger from the deception never entered my head.
From elizabeth's thoughts it was never absent.
But now that my dear uncle is come, i hope everything will be well.
Is my father in town?
Yes, he went on tuesday, as i wrote you word.
And have you heard from him often?
We have heard only twice.
And my mother how is she?
My mother is tolerably well, i trust though her spirits are greatly shaken.
She is up stairs and will have great satisfaction in seeing you all.
She does not yet leave her dressing room.
Mary and kitty, thank heaven, are quite well.
But you how are you?
How much you must have gone through!
Why did the forsters ever let her go out of their sight?
It is not quite a week since they left brighton.
My dear brother, replied mrs. bennet, that is exactly what i could most wish for.
And, above all, keep mr. bennet from fighting.
Oh, brother, how kind you are!
I know you will contrive it all.
One came from her books, and the other from her toilette.
What did colonel forster say?
Had they no apprehension of anything before the elopement took place?
They must have seen them together for ever.
I am so grieved for him!
His behaviour was attentive and kind to the utmost.
And was denny convinced that wickham would not marry?
Did he know of their intending to go off?
Had colonel forster seen denny himself?
How was it possible that such an idea should enter our brains?
She had known, it seems, of their being in love with each other, many weeks.
But not before they went to brighton?
And did colonel forster appear to think well of wickham himself?
Does he know his real character?
He believed him to be imprudent and extravagant.
Perhaps it would have been better, replied her sister.
We acted with the best intentions.
Could colonel forster repeat the particulars of lydia's note to his wife?
He brought it with him for us to see.
Jane then took it from her pocket book, and gave it to elizabeth.
I should never be happy without him, so think it no harm to be off.
What a good joke it will be!
I can hardly write for laughing.
Give my love to colonel forster.
I hope you will drink to our good journey.
Your affectionate friend, lydia bennet.
Cried elizabeth when she had finished it.
What a letter is this, to be written at such a moment!
But at least it shows that she was serious on the subject of their journey.
How he must have felt it!
I never saw anyone so shocked.
He could not speak a word for full ten minutes.
My mother was taken ill immediately, and the whole house in such confusion!
But to be guarded at such a time is very difficult.
But the horror of what might possibly happen almost took from me my faculties.
Your attendance upon her has been too much for you.
You do not look well.
Oh that i had been with you!
You have had every care and anxiety upon yourself alone.
She was of great use and comfort to us all.
Assistance is impossible condolence insufferable.
Let them triumph over us at a distance, and be satisfied.
Mr. gardiner had waited only for the letters before he set off.
At present we have nothing to guide us.
The arrival of letters was the grand object of every morning's impatience.
The death of your daughter would have been a blessing in comparison of this.
I am, dear sir, etc., etc.
Mr. gardiner did not attempt to conceal these particulars from the longbourn family.
Jane heard them with horror.
I had not an idea of it.
What, is he coming home, and without poor lydia?
Sure he will not leave london before he has found them.
Who is to fight wickham, and make him marry her, if he comes away?
Elizabeth had received none since her return that could come from pemberley.
It would have spared her, she thought, one sleepless night out of two.
When mr. bennet arrived, he had all the appearance of his usual philosophic composure.
Who should suffer but myself?
It has been my own doing, and i ought to feel it.
You must not be too severe upon yourself, replied elizabeth.
You may well warn me against such an evil.
Human nature is so prone to fall into it!
I am not afraid of being overpowered by the impression.
It will pass away soon enough.
Do you suppose them to be in london?
Yes where else can they be so well concealed?
And lydia used to want to go to london, added kitty.
They were interrupted by miss bennet, who came to fetch her mother's tea.
I am not going to run away, papa, said kitty fretfully.
If i should ever go to brighton, i would behave better than lydia.
I would not trust you so near it as eastbourne for fifty pounds!
Balls will be absolutely prohibited, unless you stand up with one of your sisters.
Kitty, who took all these threats in a serious light, began to cry.
Well, well, said he, do not make yourself unhappy.
What do you mean, hill?
We have heard nothing from town.
He has been here this half hour, and master has had a letter.
Away ran the girls, too eager to get in to have time for speech.
Have you heard from my uncle?
Yes i have had a letter from him by express.
Well, and what news does it bring good or bad?
What is there of good to be expected?
Said he, taking the letter from his pocket.
But perhaps you would like to read it.
Elizabeth impatiently caught it from his hand.
Read it aloud, said their father, for i hardly know myself what it is about.
The particulars i reserve till we meet it is enough to know they are discovered.
Elizabeth read on i have seen them both.
Send back your answer as fast as you can, and be careful to write explicitly.
She comes to us to day.
I shall write again as soon as anything more is determined on.
Cried elizabeth, when she had finished.
Can it be possible that he will marry her?
Wickham is not so undeserving, then, as we thought him, said her sister.
My dear father, i congratulate you.
And have you answered the letter?
No but it must be done soon.
Most earnestly did she then entreat him to lose no more time before he wrote.
My dear father, she cried, come back and write immediately.
Consider how important every moment is in such a case.
Let me write for you, said jane, if you dislike the trouble yourself.
I dislike it very much, he replied but it must be done.
And so saying, he turned back with them, and walked towards the house.
And may i ask said elizabeth but the terms, i suppose, must be complied with.
I am only ashamed of his asking so little.
Yet he is such a man!
Yes, yes, they must marry.
There is nothing else to be done.
Cried jane, what do you mean, sir?
That is very true, said elizabeth though it had not occurred to me before.
His debts to be discharged, and something still to remain!
It must be my uncle's doings!
Generous, good man, i am afraid he has distressed himself.
A small sum could not do all this.
How is half such a sum to be repaid?
And they are really to be married!
Cried elizabeth, as soon as they were by themselves.
And for this we are to be thankful.
He has children of his own, and may have more.
How could he spare half ten thousand pounds?
The kindness of my uncle and aunt can never be requited.
By this time she is actually with them!
What a meeting for her, when she first sees my aunt!
It is useless to talk of it.
He was writing and, without raising his head, coolly replied just as you please.
May we take my uncle's letter to read to her?
Take whatever you like, and get away.
Elizabeth took the letter from his writing table, and they went up stairs together.
Mary and kitty were both with mrs. bennet one communication would, therefore, do for all.
After a slight preparation for good news, the letter was read aloud.
Mrs. bennet could hardly contain herself.
To know that her daughter would be married was enough.
I shall see her again!
She will be married at sixteen!
I knew how it would be.
I knew he would manage everything!
How i long to see her!
And to see dear wickham too!
But the clothes, the wedding clothes!
I will write to my sister gardiner about them directly.
Stay, stay, i will go myself.
Ring the bell, kitty, for hill.
I will put on my things in a moment.
How merry we shall be together when we meet!
We are persuaded that he has pledged himself to assist mr. wickham with money.
In a short time i shall have a daughter married.
And she was only sixteen last june.
Other schemes, too, came into her head.
Kitty, run down and order the carriage.
An airing would do me a great deal of good, i am sure.
Girls, can i do anything for you in meryton?
My dear hill, have you heard the good news?
Mrs. hill began instantly to express her joy.
He now wished it more than ever.
Five thousand pounds was settled by marriage articles on mrs. bennet and the children.
The good news spread quickly through the house, and with proportionate speed through the neighbourhood.
It was borne in the latter with decent philosophy.
No sentiment of shame gave a damp to her triumph.
Her husband allowed her to talk on without interruption while the servants remained.
Into one house in this neighbourhood they shall never have admittance.
I will not encourage the impudence of either, by receiving them at longbourn.
A long dispute followed this declaration but mr. bennet was firm.
Mrs. bennet could hardly comprehend it.
She had no fear of its spreading farther through his means.
From such a connection she could not wonder that he would shrink.
She was humbled, she was grieved she repented, though she hardly knew of what.
She wanted to hear of him, when there seemed the least chance of gaining intelligence.
His understanding and temper, though unlike her own, would have answered all her wishes.
How wickham and lydia were to be supported in tolerable independence, she could not imagine.
Mr. gardiner soon wrote again to his brother.
It is an advantage to have it so far from this part of the kingdom.
Haggerston has our directions, and all will be completed in a week.
She is well, and begs to be dutifully remembered to you and her mother.
But mrs. bennet was not so well pleased with it.
And there are several of the young men, too, that she likes very much.
The officers may not be so pleasant in general 's regiment.
The family were assembled in the breakfast room to receive them.
Their reception from mr. bennet, to whom they then turned, was not quite so cordial.
His countenance rather gained in austerity and he scarcely opened his lips.
The easy assurance of the young couple, indeed, was enough to provoke him.
Elizabeth was disgusted, and even miss bennet was shocked.
Lydia was lydia still untamed, unabashed, wild, noisy, and fearless.
There was no want of discourse.
They seemed each of them to have the happiest memories in the world.
Though i thought it would be very good fun if i was.
Her father lifted up his eyes.
Mamma, do the people hereabouts know i am married to day?
Elizabeth could bear it no longer.
Her ease and good spirits increased.
Is not he a charming man?
I am sure my sisters must all envy me.
I only hope they may have half my good luck.
They must all go to brighton.
That is the place to get husbands.
Very true and if i had my will, we should.
But my dear lydia, i don't at all like your going such a way off.
Yes there is nothing in that.
I shall like it of all things.
You and papa, and my sisters, must come down and see us.
I should like it beyond anything!
Their visitors were not to remain above ten days with them.
Lydia was exceedingly fond of him.
You were not by, when i told mamma and the others all about it.
Are not you curious to hear how it was managed?
No really, replied elizabeth i think there cannot be too little said on the subject.
But i must tell you how it went off.
We were married, you know, at st. clement's, because wickham's lodgings were in that parish.
And it was settled that we should all be there by eleven o'clock.
Well, monday morning came, and i was in such a fuss!
I longed to know whether he would be married in his blue coat.
Not one party, or scheme, or anything.
To be sure london was rather thin, but, however, the little theatre was open.
And then, you know, when once they get together, there is no end of it.
Repeated elizabeth, in utter amazement.
He was to come there with wickham, you know.
I ought not to have said a word about it.
I promised them so faithfully!
It was to be such a secret!
If it was to be secret, said jane, say not another word on the subject.
You may depend upon my seeking no further.
Certainly, said elizabeth, though burning with curiosity we will ask you no questions.
Mr. darcy had been at her sister's wedding.
If you do not choose to understand me, forgive my impertinence.
But if you are really innocent and ignorant, i must be more explicit.
Mr. darcy called, and was shut up with him several hours.
His character was to speak for itself.
If he had another motive, i am sure it would never disgrace him.
At length, however, our kind friend procured the wished for direction.
He saw wickham, and afterwards insisted on seeing lydia.
But he found lydia absolutely resolved on remaining where she was.
Mr. darcy asked him why he had not married your sister at once.
They met several times, for there was much to be discussed.
On saturday he came again.
They met again on sunday, and then i saw him too.
But our visitor was very obstinate.
I fancy, lizzy, that obstinacy is the real defect of his character, after all.
But, lizzy, this must go no farther than yourself, or jane at most.
You know pretty well, i suppose, what has been done for the young people.
I believe i have now told you every thing.
Lydia came to us and wickham had constant admission to the house.
Mr. darcy was punctual in his return, and as lydia informed you, attended the wedding.
I thought him very sly he hardly ever mentioned your name.
But slyness seems the fashion.
A low phaeton, with a nice little pair of ponies, would be the very thing.
But i must write no more.
The children have been wanting me this half hour.
Yours, very sincerely, m. gardiner.
He had done all this for a girl whom he could neither regard nor esteem.
Her heart did whisper that he had done it for her.
Brother in law of wickham!
Every kind of pride must revolt from the connection.
He had, to be sure, done much.
She was ashamed to think how much.
They owed the restoration of lydia, her character, every thing, to him.
For herself she was humbled but she was proud of him.
She read over her aunt's commendation of him again and again.
It was hardly enough but it pleased her.
I am afraid i interrupt your solitary ramble, my dear sister?
Said he, as he joined her.
I should be sorry indeed, if it were.
We were always good friends and now we are better.
Are the others coming out?
Mrs. bennet and lydia are going in the carriage to meryton.
She replied in the affirmative.
And you saw the old housekeeper, i suppose?
Poor reynolds, she was always very fond of me.
But of course she did not mention my name to you.
And what did she say?
At such a distance as that , you know, things are strangely misrepresented.
Certainly, he replied, biting his lips.
We passed each other several times.
I wonder what he can be doing there.
Perhaps preparing for his marriage with miss de bourgh, said elizabeth.
It must be something particular, to take him there at this time of year.
Did you see him while you were at lambton?
I thought i understood from the gardiners that you had.
Yes he introduced us to his sister.
And do you like her?
I have heard, indeed, that she is uncommonly improved within this year or two.
When i last saw her, she was not very promising.
I am very glad you liked her.
I hope she will turn out well.
I dare say she will she has got over the most trying age.
Did you go by the village of kympton?
I do not recollect that we did.
I mention it, because it is the living which i ought to have had.
It would have suited me in every respect.
How should you have liked making sermons?
But it was not to be.
Did you ever hear darcy mention the circumstance, when you were in kent?
And it was not wholly without foundation.
Do not let us quarrel about the past.
In future, i hope we shall be always of one mind.
My dear lydia, she cried, when shall we meet again?
Not these two or three years, perhaps.
Write to me very often, my dear.
As often as i can.
But you know married women have never much time for writing.
My sisters may write to me .
They will have nothing else to do.
Mr. wickham's adieus were much more affectionate than his wife's.
He smiled, looked handsome, and said many pretty things.
He simpers, and smirks, and makes love to us all.
I am prodigiously proud of him.
I defy even sir william lucas himself to produce a more valuable son in law.
The loss of her daughter made mrs. bennet very dull for several days.
One seems so forlorn without them.
This is the consequence, you see, madam, of marrying a daughter, said elizabeth.
It must make you better satisfied that your other four are single.
It is no such thing.
If that had been nearer, she would not have gone so soon.
Mrs. bennet was quite in the fidgets.
She looked at jane, and smiled and shook her head by turns.
Well, well, and so mr. bingley is coming down, sister, .
Well, so much the better.
Not that i care about it, though.
But, however, he is very welcome to come to netherfield, if he likes it.
And who knows what may happen?
But that is nothing to us.
You know, sister, we agreed long ago never to mention a word about it.
And so, is it quite certain he is coming?
He comes down on thursday at the latest, very likely on wednesday.
Miss bennet had not been able to hear of his coming without changing colour.
But don't imagine it was from any silly cause.
Not that i am afraid of myself , but i dread other people's remarks.
Elizabeth did not know what to make of it.
I will leave him to himself.
They were more disturbed, more unequal, than she had often seen them.
Tis an etiquette i despise, said he.
If he wants our society, let him seek it.
He knows where we live.
But, however, that shan't prevent my asking him to dine here, i am determined.
We must have mrs. long and the gouldings soon.
Happy shall i be, when his stay at netherfield is over!
Her daughters were eagerly called to partake of her joy.
There is a gentleman with him, mamma, said kitty who can it be?
Some acquaintance or other, my dear, i suppose i am sure i do not know.
Replied kitty, it looks just like that man that used to be with him before.
And so it does, i vow.
Jane looked at elizabeth with surprise and concern.
Both sisters were uncomfortable enough.
But she would not be secure.
Jane looked a little paler than usual, but more sedate than elizabeth had expected.
She had ventured only one glance at darcy.
It was a painful, but not an improbable, conjecture.
There he had talked to her friends, when he could not to herself.
More thoughtfulness and less anxiety to please, than when they last met, were plainly expressed.
She was disappointed, and angry with herself for being so.
Could i expect it to be otherwise!
Yet why did he come?
She inquired after his sister, but could do no more.
It is a long time, mr. bingley, since you went away, said mrs. bennet.
He readily agreed to it.
I began to be afraid you would never come back again.
A great many changes have happened in the neighbourhood, since you went away.
Miss lucas is married and settled.
And one of my own daughters.
It was only said, 'lately, george wickham, esq.
Bingley replied that he did, and made his congratulations.
Elizabeth dared not lift up her eyes.
How mr. darcy looked, therefore, she could not tell.
He has some friends, though perhaps not so many as he deserves.
A few weeks, he believed.
Elizabeth's misery increased, at such unnecessary, such officious attention!
Their society can afford no pleasure that will atone for such wretchedness as this!
Let me never see either one or the other again!
Mr. darcy's behaviour astonished and vexed her.
She could settle it in no way that gave her pleasure.
If he fears me, why come hither?
If he no longer cares for me, why silent?
I will think no more about him.
Now, said she, that this first meeting is over, i feel perfectly easy.
I know my own strength, and i shall never be embarrassed again by his coming.
I am glad he dines here on tuesday.
Yes, very indifferent indeed, said elizabeth, laughingly.
My dear lizzy, you cannot think me so weak, as to be in danger now?
He placed himself by her.
Elizabeth, with a triumphant sensation, looked towards his friend.
Mr. darcy was almost as far from her as the table could divide them.
He was on one side of her mother.
We want none of them do we?
Darcy had walked away to another part of the room.
A man who has once been refused!
How could i ever be foolish enough to expect a renewal of his love?
There is no indignity so abhorrent to their feelings!
Yes, she will remain there till christmas.
Have all her friends left her?
Mrs. annesley is with her.
The others have been gone on to scarborough, these three weeks.
She now lost every expectation of pleasure.
I think every thing has passed off uncommonly well, i assure you.
The dinner was as well dressed as any i ever saw.
And, my dear jane, i never saw you look in greater beauty.
Mrs. long said so too, for i asked her whether you did not.
And what do you think she said besides?
Mrs. bennet, we shall have her at netherfield at last.
It has been a very agreeable day, said miss bennet to elizabeth.
The party seemed so well selected, so suitable one with the other.
I hope we may often meet again.
Lizzy, you must not do so.
You must not suspect me.
How hard it is in some cases to be believed!
And how impossible in others!
But why should you wish to persuade me that i feel more than i acknowledge?
That is a question which i hardly know how to answer.
We all love to instruct, though we can teach only what is not worth knowing.
Forgive me and if you persist in indifference, do not make me your confidante.
He sat with them above an hour, and was in remarkably good spirits.
Next time you call, said she, i hope we shall be more lucky.
He should be particularly happy at any time, etc.
Can you come to morrow?
He is come mr. bingley is come.
Here, sarah, come to miss bennet this moment, and help her on with her gown.
Never mind miss lizzy's hair.
What has she to do with it?
Come be quick, be quick!
Where is your sash, my dear?
The same anxiety to get them by themselves was visible again in the evening.
What do you keep winking at me for?
What am i to do?
I did not wink at you.
Elizabeth was forced to go.
Kitty and i are going up stairs to sit in my dressing room.
Mrs. bennet's schemes for this day were ineffectual.
Bingley was every thing that was charming, except the professed lover of her daughter.
After this day, jane said no more of her indifference.
The latter was much more agreeable than his companion expected.
Their situation was awkward enough but hers she thought was still worse.
She added, by far too much.
I do not deserve it.
Why is not everybody as happy?
Every sentence of kindness was a fresh source of happiness to jane.
I must go instantly to my mother she cried.
He is gone to my father already.
How shall i bear so much happiness!
And this, said she, is the end of all his friend's anxious circumspection!
Of all his sister's falsehood and contrivance!
The happiest, wisest, most reasonable end!
Said he hastily, as he opened the door.
With my mother up stairs.
She will be down in a moment, i dare say.
Elizabeth honestly and heartily expressed her delight in the prospect of their relationship.
Kitty simpered and smiled, and hoped her turn was coming soon.
You will be a very happy woman.
Jane went to him instantly, kissed him, and thanked him for his goodness.
I have not a doubt of your doing very well together.
Your tempers are by no means unlike.
Imprudence or thoughtlessness in money matters would be unpardonable in me.
My dear mr. bennet, cried his wife, what are you talking of?
Why, he has four or five thousand a year, and very likely more.
Then addressing her daughter, oh!
My dear, dear jane, i am so happy!
I am sure i shan't get a wink of sleep all night.
I always said it must be so, at last.
I was sure you could not be so beautiful for nothing!
He is the handsomest young man that ever was seen!
Wickham, lydia, were all forgotten.
Jane was beyond competition her favourite child.
At that moment, she cared for no other.
I had not believed it possible.
I suspected as much, replied elizabeth.
But how did he account for it?
It must have been his sister's doing.
That is the most unforgiving speech, said elizabeth, that i ever heard you utter.
I am certainly the most fortunate creature that ever existed!
Lizzy, why am i thus singled from my family, and blessed above them all!
If i could but see you as happy!
If there were but such another man for you!
Till i have your disposition, your goodness, i never can have your happiness.
The situation of affairs in the longbourn family could not be long a secret.
It was lady catherine de bourgh.
That lady, i suppose, is your mother.
Elizabeth replied very concisely that she was.
And that i suppose is one of your sisters.
Yes, madam, said mrs. bennet, delighted to speak to lady catherine.
She is my youngest girl but one.
You have a very small park here, returned lady catherine after a short silence.
I saw them the night before last.
But no letter appeared, and she was completely puzzled.
Go, my dear, cried her mother, and show her ladyship about the different walks.
I think she will be pleased with the hermitage.
How could i ever think her like her nephew?
Said she, as she looked in her face.
Your own heart, your own conscience, must tell you why i come.
Elizabeth looked with unaffected astonishment.
Indeed, you are mistaken, madam.
But however insincere you may choose to be, you shall not find me so.
A report of a most alarming nature reached me two days ago.
What could your ladyship propose by it?
At once to insist upon having such a report universally contradicted.
Do you then pretend to be ignorant of it?
Has it not been industriously circulated by yourselves?
Do you not know that such a report is spread abroad?
I never heard that it was.
And can you likewise declare, that there is no foundation for it?
I do not pretend to possess equal frankness with your ladyship.
You may ask questions which i shall not choose to answer.
This is not to be borne.
Miss bennet, i insist on being satisfied.
Has he, has my nephew, made you an offer of marriage?
Your ladyship has declared it to be impossible.
You may have drawn him in.
If i have, i shall be the last person to confess it.
Miss bennet, do you know who i am?
I have not been accustomed to such language as this.
Let me be rightly understood.
This match, to which you have the presumption to aspire, can never take place.
Mr. darcy is engaged to my daughter.
Now what have you to say?
From their infancy, they have been intended for each other.
It was the favourite wish of his mother, as well as of hers.
Do you pay no regard to the wishes of his friends?
To his tacit engagement with miss de bourgh?
Are you lost to every feeling of propriety and delicacy?
Yes, and i had heard it before.
But what is that to me?
You both did as much as you could in planning the marriage.
Its completion depended on others.
And if i am that choice, why may not i accept him?
Because honour, decorum, prudence, nay, interest, forbid it.
You will be censured, slighted, and despised, by everyone connected with him.
These are heavy misfortunes, replied elizabeth.
I am ashamed of you!
Is this your gratitude for my attentions to you last spring?
Is nothing due to me on that score?
I have not been used to submit to any person's whims.
I have not been in the habit of brooking disappointment.
I will not be interrupted.
My daughter and my nephew are formed for each other.
Their fortune on both sides is splendid.
The upstart pretensions of a young woman without family, connections, or fortune.
Is this to be endured!
But it must not, shall not be.
In marrying your nephew, i should not consider myself as quitting that sphere.
He is a gentleman i am a gentleman's daughter so far we are equal.
You are a gentleman's daughter.
But who was your mother?
Who are your uncles and aunts?
Do not imagine me ignorant of their condition.
Tell me once for all, are you engaged to him?
And will you promise me, never to enter into such an engagement?
I will make no promise of the kind.
Miss bennet i am shocked and astonished.
I expected to find a more reasonable young woman.
But do not deceive yourself into a belief that i will ever recede.
I shall not go away till you have given me the assurance i require.
And i certainly never shall give it.
I am not to be intimidated into anything so wholly unreasonable.
I must beg, therefore, to be importuned no farther on the subject.
Not so hasty, if you please.
I have by no means done.
To all the objections i have already urged, i have still another to add.
I am no stranger to the particulars of your youngest sister's infamous elopement.
And is such a girl to be my nephew's sister?
Is her husband, is the son of his late father's steward, to be his brother?
Of what are you thinking?
Are the shades of pemberley to be thus polluted?
You can now have nothing further to say, she resentfully answered.
You have insulted me in every possible method.
I must beg to return to the house.
And she rose as she spoke.
Lady catherine rose also, and they turned back.
Her ladyship was highly incensed.
You have no regard, then, for the honour and credit of my nephew!
Lady catherine, i have nothing further to say.
You are then resolved to have him?
I have said no such thing.
You refuse, then, to oblige me.
You refuse to obey the claims of duty, honour, and gratitude.
No principle of either would be violated by my marriage with mr. darcy.
And this is your real opinion!
This is your final resolve!
I shall now know how to act.
Do not imagine, miss bennet, that your ambition will ever be gratified.
I came to try you.
I hoped to find you reasonable but, depend upon it, i will carry my point.
I send no compliments to your mother.
You deserve no such attention.
I am most seriously displeased.
She heard the carriage drive away as she proceeded up stairs.
She did not choose it, said her daughter, she would go.
She is a very fine looking woman!
And her calling here was prodigiously civil!
For she only came, i suppose, to tell us the collinses were well.
I suppose she had nothing particular to say to you, lizzy?
It was a rational scheme, to be sure!
In that case he would return no more.
I shall then give over every expectation, every wish of his constancy.
Lizzy, said he, i was going to look for you come into my room.
She followed her father to the fire place, and they both sat down.
He then said, i have received a letter this morning that has astonished me exceedingly.
As it principally concerns yourself, you ought to know its contents.
I did not know before, that i had two daughters on the brink of matrimony.
Let me congratulate you on a very important conquest.
And what can he have to say?
Something very much to the purpose of course.
I shall not sport with your impatience, by reading what he says on that point.
Can you possibly guess, lizzy, who is meant by this?
Have you any idea, lizzy, who this gentleman is?
But now it comes out 'my motive for cautioning you is as follows.
Mr. darcy , you see, is the man!
Now, lizzy, i think i have surprised you.
Never had his wit been directed in a manner so little agreeable to her.
That is his notion of christian forgiveness!
But, lizzy, you look as if you did not enjoy it.
Cried elizabeth, i am excessively diverted.
But it is so strange!
Yes that is what makes it amusing.
And pray, lizzy, what said lady catherine about this report?
Did she call to refuse her consent?
It was necessary to laugh, when she would rather have cried.
Bingley and jane, however, soon allowed the others to outstrip them.
They lagged behind, while elizabeth, kitty, and darcy were to entertain each other.
I can no longer help thanking you for your unexampled kindness to my poor sister.
I did not think mrs. gardiner was so little to be trusted.
You must not blame my aunt.
If you will thank me, he replied, let it be for yourself alone.
But your family owe me nothing.
Much as i respect them, i believe i thought only of you .
Elizabeth was too much embarrassed to say a word.
After a short pause, her companion added, you are too generous to trifle with me.
If your feelings are still what they were last april, tell me so at once.
They walked on, without knowing in what direction.
But, unluckily for her ladyship, its effect had been exactly contrariwise.
What did you say of me, that i did not deserve?
I cannot think of it without abhorrence.
I cannot be so easily reconciled to myself.
I was certainly very far from expecting them to make so strong an impression.
I had not the smallest idea of their being ever felt in such a way.
I can easily believe it.
You thought me then devoid of every proper feeling, i am sure you did.
Do not repeat what i then said.
These recollections will not do at all.
I assure you that i have long been most heartily ashamed of it.
Did it, said he, did it soon make you think better of me?
Did you, on reading it, give any credit to its contents?
I hope you have destroyed the letter.
I can remember some expressions which might justly make you hate me.
The letter, perhaps, began in bitterness, but it did not end so.
The adieu is charity itself.
But think no more of the letter.
You must learn some of my philosophy.
Think only of the past as its remembrance gives you pleasure.
I cannot give you credit for any philosophy of the kind.
But with me, it is not so.
Painful recollections will intrude which cannot, which ought not, to be repelled.
I have been a selfish being all my life, in practice, though not in principle.
I was given good principles, but left to follow them in pride and conceit.
What do i not owe you!
You taught me a lesson, hard indeed at first, but most advantageous.
By you, i was properly humbled.
I came to you without a doubt of my reception.
Had you then persuaded yourself that i should?
What will you think of my vanity?
I believed you to be wishing, expecting my addresses.
My manners must have been in fault, but not intentionally, i assure you.
I never meant to deceive you, but my spirits might often lead me wrong.
How you must have hated me after that evening?
You blamed me for coming?
No indeed i felt nothing but surprise.
Your surprise could not be greater than mine in being noticed by you.
What could become of mr. bingley and jane!
Was a wonder which introduced the discussion of their affairs.
I must ask whether you were surprised?
When i went away, i felt that it would soon happen.
That is to say, you had given your permission.
He had never had the slightest suspicion.
Elizabeth could not help smiling at his easy manner of directing his friend.
And your assurance of it, i suppose, carried immediate conviction to him.
Bingley is most unaffectedly modest.
He has heartily forgiven me now.
In the hall they parted.
The evening passed quietly, unmarked by anything extraordinary.
The acknowledged lovers talked and laughed, the unacknowledged were silent.
At night she opened her heart to jane.
Though suspicion was very far from miss bennet's general habits, she was absolutely incredulous here.
No, no, you shall not deceive me.
I know it to be impossible.
This is a wretched beginning indeed!
Yet, indeed, i am in earnest.
I speak nothing but the truth.
He still loves me, and we are engaged.
Jane looked at her doubtingly.
I know how much you dislike him.
You know nothing of the matter.
That is all to be forgot.
Perhaps i did not always love him so well as i do now.
But in such cases as these, a good memory is unpardonable.
This is the last time i shall ever remember it myself.
Miss bennet still looked all amazement.
Elizabeth again, and more seriously assured her of its truth.
Can it be really so!
Yet now i must believe you, cried jane.
My dear, dear lizzy, i would i do congratulate you but are you certain?
Forgive the question are you quite certain that you can be happy with him?
There can be no doubt of that.
But are you pleased, jane?
Nothing could give either bingley or myself more delight.
But we considered it, we talked of it as impossible.
And do you really love him quite well enough?
Do anything rather than marry without affection.
Why, i must confess that i love him better than i do bingley.
I am afraid you will be angry.
My dearest sister, now be serious.
I want to talk very seriously.
Let me know every thing that i am to know, without delay.
Will you tell me how long you have loved him?
It has been coming on so gradually, that i hardly know when it began.
When convinced on that article, miss bennet had nothing further to wish.
Now i am quite happy, said she, for you will be as happy as myself.
I always had a value for him.
But lizzy, you have been very sly, very reserved with me.
How little did you tell me of what passed at pemberley and lambton!
I owe all that i know of it to another, not to you.
Elizabeth told her the motives of her secrecy.
But now she would no longer conceal from her his share in lydia's marriage.
All was acknowledged, and half the night spent in conversation.
What can he mean by being so tiresome as to be always coming here?
What shall we do with him?
It is a nice long walk, and mr. darcy has never seen the view.
Kitty owned that she had rather stay at home.
So, do not put yourself to inconvenience.
Elizabeth reserved to herself the application for her mother's.
Her father was walking about the room, looking grave and anxious.
Lizzy, said he, what are you doing?
Are you out of your senses, to be accepting this man?
Have not you always hated him?
Or, in other words, you are determined to have him.
But will they make you happy?
Have you any other objection, said elizabeth, than your belief of my indifference?
Indeed he has no improper pride.
Lizzy, said her father, i have given him my consent.
I now give it to you , if you are resolved on having him.
But let me advise you to think better of it.
I know your disposition, lizzy.
Your lively talents would place you in the greatest danger in an unequal marriage.
You could scarcely escape discredit and misery.
You know not what you are about.
Well, my dear, said he, when she ceased speaking, i have no more to say.
If this be the case, he deserves you.
I could not have parted with you, my lizzy, to anyone less worthy.
He heard her with astonishment.
This is an evening of wonders, indeed!
It will save me a world of trouble and economy.
Who would have thought it!
And is it really true?
How rich and how great you will be!
What pin money, what jewels, what carriages you will have!
Jane's is nothing to it nothing at all.
I am so pleased so happy.
Pray apologise for my having disliked him so much before.
I hope he will overlook it.
Every thing that is charming!
What will become of me.
But before she had been three minutes in her own room, her mother followed her.
My dearest child, she cried, i can think of nothing else!
Ten thousand a year, and very likely more!
Tis as good as a lord!
You must and shall be married by a special licence.
I admire all my three sons in law highly, said he.
It is too long ago.
I was in the middle before i knew that i had begun.
Now be sincere did you admire me for my impertinence?
For the liveliness of your mind, i did.
You may as well call it impertinence at once.
It was very little less.
The fact is, that you were sick of civility, of deference, of officious attention.
I roused, and interested you, because i was so unlike them .
Who could have done less for her?
But make a virtue of it by all means.
What made you so shy of me, when you first called, and afterwards dined here?
Because you were grave and silent, and gave me no encouragement.
You might have talked to me more when you came to dinner.
A man who had felt less, might.
I wonder when you would have spoken, if i had not asked you!
My resolution of thanking you for your kindness to lydia had certainly great effect.
For i ought not to have mentioned the subject.
You need not distress yourself.
The moral will be perfectly fair.
Lady catherine's unjustifiable endeavours to separate us were the means of removing all my doubts.
I was not in a humour to wait for any opening of yours.
But tell me, what did you come down to netherfield for?
Was it merely to ride to longbourn and be embarrassed?
Or had you intended any more serious consequence?
Shall you ever have courage to announce to lady catherine what is to befall her?
I am more likely to want more time than courage, elizabeth.
But i have an aunt, too, who must not be longer neglected.
You supposed more than really existed.
I thank you, again and again, for not going to the lakes.
How could i be so silly as to wish it!
Your idea of the ponies is delightful.
We will go round the park every day.
I am the happiest creature in the world.
Perhaps other people have said so before, but not one with such justice.
I am happier even than jane she only smiles, i laugh.
You are all to come to pemberley at christmas.
Dear sir, i must trouble you once more for congratulations.
Elizabeth will soon be the wife of mr. darcy.
Console lady catherine as well as you can.
But, if i were you, i would stand by the nephew.
He has more to give.
The reason of this sudden removal was soon evident.
He bore it, however, with admirable calmness.
He delighted in going to pemberley, especially when he was least expected.
Mr. bingley and jane remained at netherfield only a twelvemonth.
In society so superior to what she had generally known, her improvement was great.
The letter was to this effect my dear lizzy, i wish you joy.
They were able to love each other even as well as they intended.
Her mind received knowledge which had never before fallen in her way.
With the gardiners, they were always on the most intimate terms.
One of tom sawyers's lies .
He went for judge thatcher.
A pirate at the camp meeting.
The duke as a printer.
Suspicious of huck, quick sales and small.
Mary jane decides to leave.
Huck parting with mary jane.
The king explains the loss.
The king went for him.
The hut by the ash hopper.
Hand out them letters .
In a fix hello, what's up?
Was you in my room?
It was tom sawyer mr. archibald nichols, i presume?
Huckleberry finn scene the mississippi valley time forty to fifty years ago chapter i.
That book was made by mr. mark twain, and he told the truth, mainly.
There was things which he stretched, but mainly he told the truth.
We got six thousand dollars apiece all gold.
Well, then, the old thing commenced again.
The widow rung a bell for supper, and you had to come to time.
Pretty soon i wanted to smoke, and asked the widow to let me.
That is just the way with some people.
They get down on a thing when they don't know nothing about it.
I couldn't stood it much longer.
Then for an hour it was deadly dull, and i was fidgety.
She got mad then, but i didn't mean no harm.
So i didn't think much of it.
But i never said so.
I was glad about that, because i wanted him and me to be together.
Miss watson she kept pecking at me, and it got tiresome and lonesome.
I felt so lonesome i most wished i was dead.
I got so down hearted and scared i did wish i had some company.
But i hadn't no confidence.
I set still and listened.
Directly i could just barely hear a me yow!
We scrouched down and laid still.
He got up and stretched his neck out about a minute, listening.
Then he says who dah?
Seemed like i'd die if i couldn't scratch.
Well, i've noticed that thing plenty times since.
Pretty soon jim says say, who is you?
Dog my cats ef i didn' hear sumf'n.
So he set down on the ground betwixt me and tom.
My nose begun to itch.
It itched till the tears come into my eyes.
Then it begun to itch on the inside.
Next i got to itching underneath.
I didn't know how i was going to set still.
I was itching in eleven different places now.
I didn't want him to try.
I said jim might wake up and come.
I waited, and it seemed a good while, everything was so still and lonesome.
What you know 'bout witches?
And that nigger was corked up and had to take a back seat.
Then we lit the candles, and crawled in on our hands and knees.
We went about two hundred yards, and then the cave opened up.
Tom says now, we'll start this band of robbers and call it tom sawyer's gang.
Well, hain't he got a father?
Yes, he's got a father, but you can't never find him these days.
Well, nobody could think of anything to do everybody was stumped, and set still.
Everybody said oh, she'll do.
Now, says ben rogers, what's the line of business of this gang?
Nothing only robbery and murder, tom said.
But who are we going to rob?
Houses, or cattle, or stuff!
Stealing cattle and such things ain't robbery it's burglary, says tom sawyer.
That ain't no sort of style.
Must we always kill the people?
But that's what they do.
I've seen it in books and so of course that's what we've got to do.
But how can we do it if we don't know what it is?
Why, blame it all, we've got to do it.
Don't i tell you it's in the books?
That's the thing i want to get at.
Now, what do you reckon it is?
Now, that's something like .
Why couldn't you said that before?
How you talk, ben rogers.
Because it ain't in the books so that's why.
Now, ben rogers, do you want to do things regular, or don't you?
Do you reckon you can learn 'em anything?
Not by a good deal.
No, sir, we'll just go on and ransom them in the regular way.
I don't mind but i say it's a fool way, anyhow.
Say, do we kill the women, too?
Well, ben rogers, if i was as ignorant as you i wouldn't let on.
No nobody ever saw anything in the books like that.
Well, if that's the way i'm agreed, but i don't take no stock in it.
But go ahead, i ain't got nothing to say.
I clumb up the shed and crept into my window just before day was breaking.
My new clothes was all greased up and clayey, and i was dog tired.
Once i got a fish line, but no hooks.
It warn't any good to me without hooks.
She never told me why, and i couldn't make it out no way.
Why can't the widow get back her silver snuffbox that was stole?
Why can't miss watson fat up?
No, says i to my self, there ain't nothing in it.
This was including miss watson, as i took it.
They said he was floating on his back in the water.
They took him and buried him on the bank.
But i warn't comfortable long, because i happened to think of something.
So i was uncomfortable again.
We played robber now and then about a month, and then i resigned.
We hadn't robbed nobody, hadn't killed any people, but only just pretended.
But i couldn't see no profit in it.
He said we must slick up our swords and guns, and get ready.
It warn't anything but a sunday school picnic, and only a primer class at that.
I didn't see no di'monds, and i told tom sawyer so.
I said, why couldn't we see them, then?
He said it was all done by enchantment.
Tom sawyer said i was a numskull.
They are as tall as a tree and as big around as a church.
How you going to get them?
How do they get them?
Who makes them tear around so?
Why, whoever rubs the lamp or the ring.
How you talk, huck finn.
Why, you'd have to come when he rubbed it, whether you wanted to or not.
And i as high as a tree and as big as a church?
Shucks, it ain't no use to talk to you, huck finn.
You don't seem to know anything, somehow perfect saphead.
It had all the marks of a sunday school.
I don't take no stock in mathematics, anyway.
So the longer i went to school the easier it got to be.
The widow said i was coming along slow but sure, and doing very satisfactory.
She said she warn't ashamed of me.
One morning i happened to turn over the salt cellar at breakfast.
She says, take your hands away, huckleberry what a mess you are always making!
There was an inch of new snow on the ground, and i seen somebody's tracks.
It was funny they hadn't come in, after standing around so.
I couldn't make it out.
It was very curious, somehow.
I didn't notice anything at first, but next i did.
I was up in a second and shinning down the hill.
I looked over my shoulder every now and then, but i didn't see nobody.
I was at judge thatcher's as quick as i could get there.
He said why, my boy, you are all out of breath.
Did you come for your interest?
No, sir, i says is there some for me?
Oh, yes, a half yearly is in last night over a hundred and fifty dollars.
Quite a fortune for you.
No, sir, i says, i don't want to spend it.
I don't want it at all nor the six thousand, nuther.
He couldn't seem to make it out.
He says why, what can you mean, my boy?
I says, don't you ask me no questions about it, please.
You'll take it won't you?
He says well, i'm puzzled.
He studied a while, and then he says oho o!
You want to sell all your property to me not give it.
That means i have bought it of you and paid you for it.
Here's a dollar for you.
So i signed it, and left.
He said there was a spirit inside of it, and it knowed everything.
It fell pretty solid, and only rolled about an inch.
Jim tried it again, and then another time, and it acted just the same.
Jim got down on his knees, and put his ear against it and listened.
But it warn't no use he said it wouldn't talk.
He said sometimes it wouldn't talk without money.
Well, i knowed a potato would do that before, but i had forgot it.
Jim put the quarter under the hair ball, and got down and listened again.
This time he said the hair ball was all right.
He said it would tell my whole fortune if i wanted it to.
So the hair ball talked to jim, and jim told it to me.
He says yo' ole father doan' know yit what he's a gwyne to do.
Sometimes he spec he'll go 'way, en den agin he spec he'll stay.
Dey's two angels hoverin' roun' 'bout him.
One uv 'em is white en shiny, en t'other one is black.
A body can't tell yit which one gwyne to fetch him at de las'.
But you is all right.
You gwyne to have considable trouble in yo' life, en considable joy.
Dey's two gals flyin' 'bout you in yo' life.
One uv 'em's light en t'other one is dark.
One is rich en t'other is po'.
You's gwyne to marry de po' one fust en de rich one by en by.
Chapter v. i had shut the door to.
Then i turned around and there he was.
I used to be scared of him all the time, he tanned me so much.
He was most fifty, and he looked it.
It was all black, no gray so was his long, mixed up whiskers.
As for his clothes just rags, that was all.
I set the candle down.
I noticed the window was up so he had clumb in by the shed.
He kept a looking me all over.
By and by he says starchy clothes very.
You think you're a good deal of a big bug, don't you?
Maybe i am, maybe i ain't, i says.
Don't you give me none o' your lip, says he.
You've put on considerable many frills since i been away.
I'll take you down a peg before i get done with you.
You're educated, too, they say can read and write.
You think you're better'n your father, now, don't you, because he can't?
I'll take it out of you.
Who told you you might meddle with such hifalut'n foolishness, hey?
Who told you you could?
Well, i'll learn her how to meddle.
And looky here you drop that school, you hear?
You lemme catch you fooling around that school again, you hear?
Your mother couldn't read, and she couldn't write, nuther, before she died.
None of the family couldn't before they died.
I can't and here you're a swelling yourself up like this.
I ain't the man to stand it you hear?
Say, lemme hear you read.
I took up a book and begun something about general washington and the wars.
I had my doubts when you told me.
Now looky here you stop that putting on frills.
First you know you'll get religion, too.
I never see such a son.
It's something they give me for learning my lessons good.
Why, there ain't no end to your airs they say you're rich.
I heard about it away down the river, too.
You git me that money to morrow i want it.
I hain't got no money.
I hain't got no money, i tell you.
You ask judge thatcher he'll tell you the same.
I'll ask him and i'll make him pungle, too, or i'll know the reason why.
Say, how much you got in your pocket?
So judge thatcher and the widow had to quit on the business.
You mark them words don't forget i said them.
It's a clean hand now shake it don't be afeard.
So they shook it, one after the other, all around, and cried.
The judge's wife she kissed it.
Then the old man he signed a pledge made his mark.
The judge said it was the holiest time on record, or something like that.
The judge he felt kind of sore.
He was just suited this kind of thing was right in his line.
He said he would show who was huck finn's boss.
I didn't want to go back no more.
It was pretty good times up in the woods there, take it all around.
I was all over welts.
He got to going away so much, too, and locking me in.
Once he locked me in and was gone three days.
I made up my mind i would fix up some way to leave there.
There warn't a window to it big enough for a dog to get through.
I couldn't get up the chimbly it was too narrow.
The door was thick, solid oak slabs.
I greased it up and went to work.
Pap warn't in a good humor so he was his natural self.
He said he was down town, and everything was going wrong.
He said he would like to see the widow get me.
I got the things all up to the cabin, and then it was about dark.
A body would a thought he was adam he was just all mud.
Why, just look at it and see what it's like.
And they call that govment!
A man can't get his rights in a govment like this.
Sometimes i've a mighty notion to just leave the country for good and all.
Yes, and i told 'em so i told old thatcher so to his face.
Lots of 'em heard me, and can tell what i said.
Oh, yes, this is a wonderful govment, wonderful.
And what do you think?
And that ain't the wust.
They said he could vote when he was at home.
Well, that let me out.
Thinks i, what is the country a coming to?
I says i'll never vote agin.
I says to the people, why ain't this nigger put up at auction and sold?
That's what i want to know.
And what do you reckon they said?
There, now that's a specimen.
He said so his own self afterwards.
That was always his word.
He didn't go sound asleep, but was uneasy.
He groaned and moaned and thrashed around this way and that for a long time.
There was pap looking wild, and skipping around every which way and yelling about snakes.
He started and run round and round the cabin, hollering take him off!
I never see a man look so wild in the eyes.
He wore out by and by, and laid still a while, moaning.
Then he laid stiller, and didn't make a sound.
He was laying over by the corner.
Hands off they're cold let go.
Oh, let a poor devil alone!
I could hear him through the blanket.
So he dozed off pretty soon.
And how slow and still the time did drag along.
I opened my eyes and looked around, trying to make out where i was.
It was after sun up, and i had been sound asleep.
Pap was standing over me looking sour and sick, too.
He says what you doin' with this gun?
Why didn't you roust me out?
Well, i tried to, but i couldn't i couldn't budge you.
I'll be along in a minute.
He unlocked the door, and i cleared out up the river bank.
I reckoned i would have great times now if i was over at the town.
But it warn't so this time.
It was a drift canoe sure enough, and i clumb in and paddled her ashore.
So he hadn't seen anything.
When he got along i was hard at it taking up a trot line.
I knowed he would see i was wet, and then he would be asking questions.
We got five catfish off the lines and went home.
That man warn't here for no good.
Next time you roust me out, you hear?
About twelve o'clock we turned out and went along up the bank.
By and by along comes part of a log raft nine logs fast together.
We went out with the skiff and towed it ashore.
I judged he wouldn't come back that night.
I took fish lines and matches and other things everything that was worth a cent.
I cleaned out the place.
I fetched out the gun, and now i was done.
It was all grass clear to the canoe, so i hadn't left a track.
I followed around to see.
I stood on the bank and looked out over the river.
I shot this fellow and took him into camp.
I took the axe and smashed in the door.
I beat it and hacked it considerable a doing it.
You could easy see that something had been dragged over the ground.
Nobody could spread himself like tom sawyer in such a thing as that.
Now i thought of something else.
The meal sifted out and made a little track all the way to the lake.
They won't ever hunt the river for anything but my dead carcass.
They'll soon get tired of that, and won't bother no more about me.
All right i can stop anywhere i want to.
I was pretty tired, and the first thing i knowed i was asleep.
When i woke up i didn't know where i was for a minute.
I set up and looked around, a little scared.
The river looked miles and miles across.
Everything was dead quiet, and it looked late, and smelt late.
You know what i mean i don't know the words to put it in.
Pretty soon i made it out.
I couldn't tell how many was in it.
Think's i, maybe it's pap, though i warn't expecting him.
I didn't lose no time.
And how far a body can hear on the water such nights!
I heard people talking at the ferry landing.
I heard what they said, too every word of it.
One man said it was getting towards the long days and the short nights now.
I was away below the ferry now.
It didn't take me long to get there.
Heave her head to stabboard!
I heard that just as plain as if the man was by my side.
A couple of squirrels set on a limb and jabbered at me very friendly.
I was powerful lazy and comfortable didn't want to get up and cook breakfast.
And there was the ferryboat full of people floating along down.
I knowed what was the matter now.
I see the white smoke squirt out of the ferryboat's side.
So i set there and watched the cannon smoke and listened to the boom.
But by and by along comes another one, and this time i won.
It was baker's bread what the quality eat none of your low down corn pone.
And then something struck me.
I lit a pipe and had a good long smoke, and went on watching.
Where the log forked i could peep through.
Most everybody was on the boat.
I could see them first rate, but they couldn't see me.
Then the captain sung out stand away!
Well, i see i warn't hurt, thanks to goodness.
The boat floated on and went out of sight around the shoulder of the island.
The island was three mile long.
I judged they had got to the foot, and was giving it up.
But they didn't yet a while.
I crossed over to that side and watched them.
I knowed i was all right now.
Nobody else would come a hunting after me.
Then i set out a line to catch some fish for breakfast.
And so for three days and nights.
No difference just the same thing.
But the next day i went exploring around down through the island.
They would all come handy by and by, i judged.
My heart jumped up amongst my lungs.
I slunk along another piece further, then listened again and so on, and so on.
All i could get to eat was berries and what was left over from breakfast.
By the time it was night i was pretty hungry.
I didn't wait, but shoved out and paddled away easy.
I tied up in the old place, and reckoned i would sleep in the canoe.
I couldn't, somehow, for thinking.
And every time i waked up i thought somebody had me by the neck.
So the sleep didn't do me no good.
Well, i felt better right off.
I poked along well on to an hour, everything still as rocks and sound asleep.
Well, by this time i was most down to the foot of the island.
I sat down there on a log, and looked out through the leaves.
I see the moon go off watch, and the darkness begin to blanket the river.
But i hadn't no luck somehow i couldn't seem to find the place.
I went for it, cautious and slow.
It most give me the fan tods.
He had a blanket around his head, and his head was nearly in the fire.
It was getting gray daylight now.
I bet i was glad to see him.
I hain't ever done no harm to a ghos'.
I alwuz liked dead people, en done all i could for 'em.
Well, i warn't long making him understand i warn't dead.
I was ever so glad to see jim.
I told him i warn't afraid of him telling the people where i was.
I talked along, but he only set there and looked at me never said nothing.
Then i says it's good daylight.
Make up your camp fire good.
What's de use er makin' up de camp fire to cook strawbries en sich truck?
But you got a gun, hain't you?
Den we kin git sumfn better den strawbries.
Strawberries and such truck, i says.
Is that what you live on?
I couldn' git nuffn else, he says.
Why, how long you been on the island, jim?
I come heah de night arter you's killed.
And ain't you had nothing but that kind of rubbage to eat?
Well, you must be most starved, ain't you?
I reck'n i could eat a hoss.
How long you ben on de islan'?
Since the night i got killed.
W'y, what has you lived on?
But you got a gun.
Oh, yes, you got a gun.
Now you kill sumfn en i'll make up de fire.
When breakfast was ready we lolled on the grass and eat it smoking hot.
Jim laid it in with all his might, for he was most about starved.
Then when we had got pretty well stuffed, we laid off and lazied.
Then i told him the whole thing, and he said it was smart.
He said tom sawyer couldn't get up no better plan than what i had.
He looked pretty uneasy, and didn't say nothing for a minute.
Then he says maybe i better not tell.
But you wouldn' tell on me ef i uz to tell you, would you, huck?
Blamed if i would, jim.
Well, i b'lieve you, huck.
I i run off .
But mind, you said you wouldn' tell you know you said you wouldn' tell, huck.
I said i wouldn't, and i'll stick to it.
Honest injun , i will.
I ain't a going to tell, and i ain't a going back there, anyways.
So, now, le's know all about it.
Well, you see, it 'uz dis way.
I lit out mighty quick, i tell you.
Well, i wuz dah all night.
Dey wuz somebody roun' all de time.
I 'uz powerful sorry you's killed, huck, but i ain't no mo' now.
I laid dah under de shavin's all day.
I'd made up my mine 'bout what i's agwyne to do.
So i says, a raff is what i's arter it doan' make no track.
Den i swum to de stern uv it en tuck a holt.
It clouded up en 'uz pooty dark for a little while.
So i clumb up en laid down on de planks.
De men 'uz all 'way yonder in de middle, whah de lantern wuz.
But i didn' have no luck.
I 'uz mos' to de foot er de islan' b'fo' i found' a good place.
And so you ain't had no meat nor bread to eat all this time?
Why didn't you get mud turkles?
How you gwyne to git 'm?
How could a body do it in de night?
En i warn't gwyne to show mysef on de bank in de daytime.
You've had to keep in the woods all the time, of course.
Did you hear 'em shooting the cannon?
I knowed dey was arter you.
I see um go by heah watched um thoo de bushes.
Some young birds come along, flying a yard or two at a time and lighting.
Jim said it was a sign it was going to rain.
I was going to catch some of them, but jim wouldn't let me.
He said it was death.
The same if you shook the table cloth after sundown.
I had heard about some of these things before, but not all of them.
Jim knowed all kinds of signs.
He said he knowed most everything.
He says mighty few an' dey ain't no use to a body.
What you want to know when good luck's a comin' for?
Want to keep it off?
Well, dey's some use in a sign like dat, 'kase it's so fur ahead.
Have you got hairy arms and a hairy breast, jim?
What's de use to ax dat question?
Don't you see i has?
No, but i ben rich wunst, and gwyne to be rich agin.
Wunst i had foteen dollars, but i tuck to specalat'n', en got busted out.
What did you speculate in, jim?
Well, fust i tackled stock.
Why, live stock cattle, you know.
I put ten dollars in a cow.
But i ain' gwyne to resk no mo' money in stock.
De cow up 'n' died on my han's.
So you lost the ten dollars.
No, i didn't lose it all.
I on'y los' 'bout nine of it.
I sole de hide en taller for a dollar en ten cents.
You had five dollars and ten cents left.
Did you speculate any more?
You know that one laigged nigger dat b'longs to old misto bradish?
Well, all de niggers went in, but dey didn't have much.
I wuz de on'y one dat had much.
So dey didn' none uv us git no money.
What did you do with the ten cents, jim?
But he's lucky, dey say, en i see i warn't lucky.
Well, what did come of it, jim?
Nuffn never come of it.
I couldn' manage to k'leck dat money no way en balum he couldn'.
I ain' gwyne to len' no mo' money 'dout i see de security.
Boun' to git yo' money back a hund'd times, de preacher says!
Yes en i's rich now, come to look at it.
I owns mysef, en i's wuth eight hund'd dollars.
I wisht i had de money, i wouldn' want no mo'.
This place was a tolerable long, steep hill or ridge about forty foot high.
It was cool in there.
So we built it there and cooked dinner.
We spread the blankets inside for a carpet, and eat our dinner in there.
We put all the other things handy at the back of the cavern.
It was one of these regular summer storms.
Jim, this is nice, i says.
I wouldn't want to be nowhere else but here.
Pass me along another hunk of fish and some hot corn bread.
Well, you wouldn't a ben here 'f it hadn't a ben for jim.
Chickens knows when it's gwyne to rain, en so do de birds, chile.
The ridge our cavern was in was full of them.
We could a had pets enough if we'd wanted them.
One night we catched a little section of a lumber raft nice pine planks.
She was a two story, and tilted over considerable.
We paddled out and got aboard clumb in at an upstairs window.
The light begun to come before we got to the foot of the island.
Then we looked in at the window.
So jim says hello, you!
So i hollered again, and then jim says de man ain't asleep he's dead.
You hold still i'll go en see.
He went, and bent down and looked, and says it's a dead man.
He's ben shot in de back.
I reck'n he's ben dead two er three days.
Come in, huck, but doan' look at his face it's too gashly.
I didn't look at him at all.
We put the lot into the canoe it might come good.
There was a boy's old speckled straw hat on the floor i took that, too.
We would a took the bottle, but it was broke.
There was a seedy old chest, and an old hair trunk with the hinges broke.
They stood open, but there warn't nothing left in them that was any account.
And so, take it all around, we made a good haul.
We got home all safe.
Well, here's your bad luck!
We've raked in all this truck and eight dollars besides.
I wish we could have some bad luck like this every day, jim.
Never you mind, honey, never you mind.
Don't you git too peart.
Mind i tell you, it's a comin'.
It was a tuesday that we had that talk.
I went to the cavern to get some, and found a rattlesnake in there.
He was barefooted, and the snake bit him right on the heel.
I done it, and he eat it and said it would help cure him.
He made me take off the rattles and tie them around his wrist, too.
He said that that would help.
Jim was laid up for four days and nights.
Then the swelling was all gone and he was around again.
Jim said he reckoned i would believe him next time.
But anyway it all come of looking at the moon that way, like a fool.
We couldn't handle him, of course he would a flung us into illinois.
We just set there and watched him rip and tear around till he drownded.
We split the ball open with the hatchet, and there was a spool in it.
It was as big a fish as was ever catched in the mississippi, i reckon.
Jim said he hadn't ever seen a bigger one.
He would a been worth a good deal over at the village.
That was a good notion, too.
Jim hitched it behind with the hooks, and it was a fair fit.
Jim said nobody would know me, even in the daytime, hardly.
I took notice, and done better.
I started up the illinois shore in the canoe just after dark.
I tied up and started along the bank.
I slipped up and peeped in at the window.
Come in, says the woman, and i did.
She says take a cheer.
Where 'bouts do you live?
In hookerville, seven mile below.
I've walked all the way and i'm all tired out.
It's what makes me so late.
He lives at the upper end of the town, she says.
I hain't ever been here before.
No but i don't know everybody yet.
I haven't lived here quite two weeks.
It's a considerable ways to the upper end of the town.
You better stay here all night.
No, i says i'll rest a while, i reckon, and go on.
I ain't afeared of the dark.
I says who done it?
Some think old finn done it himself.
Most everybody thought it at first.
He'll never know how nigh he come to getting lynched.
I reckoned i better keep still.
So there's a reward out for him three hundred dollars.
And there's a reward out for old finn, too two hundred dollars.
Before night they wanted to lynch him, but he was gone, you see.
People do say he warn't any too good to do it.
Oh, he's sly, i reckon.
If he don't come back for a year he'll be all right.
Yes, i reckon so, 'm.
I don't see nothing in the way of it.
Has everybody quit thinking the nigger done it?
A good many thinks he done it.
Why, are they after him yet?
Well, you're innocent, ain't you!
Does three hundred dollars lay around every day for people to pick up?
Some folks think the nigger ain't far from here.
I'm one of them but i hain't talked it around.
I didn't say any more, but i done some thinking.
I had got so uneasy i couldn't set still.
My hands shook, and i was making a bad job of it.
I wish my mother could get it.
Is your husband going over there to night?
They'll go over after midnight.
Couldn't they see better if they was to wait till daytime?
And couldn't the nigger see better, too?
I didn't think of that.
The woman kept looking at me pretty curious, and i didn't feel a bit comfortable.
Pretty soon she says, what did you say your name was, honey?
Some calls me sarah, some calls me mary.
Oh, that's the way of it?
I was feeling better then, but i wished i was out of there, anyway.
I couldn't look up yet.
She was right about the rats.
It hurt her arm so.
Then she told me to try for the next one.
She said that was first rate, and she reckoned i would hive the next one.
But she broke off to say keep your eye on the rats.
You better have the lead in your lap, handy.
But only about a minute.
Is it bill, or tom, or bob?
I reckon i shook like a leaf, and i didn't know hardly what to do.
But i says please to don't poke fun at a poor girl like me, mum.
If i'm in the way here, i'll no, you won't.
Set down and stay where you are.
I ain't going to hurt you, and i ain't going to tell on you, nuther.
You just tell me your secret, and trust me.
I'll keep it and, what's more, i'll help you.
So'll my old man if you want him to.
You see, you're a runaway 'prentice, that's all.
There ain't no harm in it.
You've been treated bad, and you made up your mind to cut.
Bless you, child, i wouldn't tell on you.
Tell me all about it now, that's a good boy.
Goshen's ten mile further up the river.
Who told you this was goshen?
He was drunk, i reckon.
He told you just exactly wrong.
Well, he did act like he was drunk, but it ain't no matter now.
I got to be moving along.
I'll fetch goshen before daylight.
I'll put you up a snack to eat.
Answer up prompt now don't stop to study over it.
Which end gets up first?
Which side of a tree does the moss grow on?
Well, i reckon you have lived in the country.
I thought maybe you was trying to hocus me again.
What's your real name, now?
Well, try to remember it, george.
And don't go about women in that old calico.
You do a girl tolerable poor, but you might fool men, maybe.
I jumped in, and was off in a hurry.
I took off the sun bonnet, for i didn't want no blinders on then.
I landed, and slopped through the timber and up the ridge and into the cavern.
There jim laid, sound asleep on the ground.
I roused him out and says git up and hump yourself, jim!
There ain't a minute to lose.
We was in ruther too much of a sweat to think of so many things.
It warn't good judgment to put everything on the raft.
I played it as low down on them as i could.
Well, then, i said, why couldn't she tell her husband to fetch a dog?
There warn't a sound there everybody was asleep.
We warn't feeling just right before that, but it was all comfortable now.
We stayed in the wigwam and let the raft take care of itself.
By and by says i, hel lo , jim, looky yonder!
It was a steamboat that had killed herself on a rock.
We was drifting straight down for her.
The lightning showed her very distinct.
So i says le's land on her, jim.
But jim was dead against it at first.
He says i doan' want to go fool'n 'long er no wrack.
Like as not dey's a watchman on dat wrack.
Jim couldn't say nothing to that, so he didn't try.
And besides, i says, we might borrow something worth having out of the captain's stateroom.
Seegars, i bet you and cost five cents apiece, solid cash.
Do you reckon tom sawyer would ever go by this thing?
Not for pie, he wouldn't.
And wouldn't he throw style into it?
Wouldn't he spread himself, nor nothing?
Why, you'd think it was christopher c'lumbus discovering kingdom come.
I wish tom sawyer was here.
Jim he grumbled a little, but give in.
The deck was high out here.
And all in the same second we seem to hear low voices in yonder!
Jim whispered and said he was feeling powerful sick, and told me to come along.
Another voice said, pretty loud it's a lie, jim turner.
You've acted this way before.
But this time you've said it jest one time too many.
You're the meanest, treacherousest hound in this country.
By this time jim was gone for the raft.
And i orter, too a mean skunk!
You never said no truer thing 'n that, you bet you.
And once he said hear him beg!
Jist because we stood on our rights that's what for.
But i lay you ain't a goin' to threaten nobody any more, jim turner.
Put up that pistol, bill.
Bill says i don't want to, jake packard.
But i don't want him killed, and i've got my reasons for it.
Bless yo' heart for them words, jake packard!
I'll never forgit you long's i live!
Says the man on the floor, sort of blubbering.
And in he come, and bill after him.
Then they stood there, with their hands on the ledge of the berth, and talked.
And, besides, a body couldn't breathe and hear such talk.
They talked low and earnest.
Bill wanted to kill turner.
He says he's said he'll tell, and he will.
Shore's you're born, he'll turn state's evidence now you hear me .
I'm for putting him out of his troubles.
So'm i, says packard, very quiet.
Blame it, i'd sorter begun to think you wasn't.
Well, then, that's all right.
Le's go and do it.
Hold on a minute i hain't had my say yit.
Shooting's good, but there's quieter ways if the thing's got to be done.
But how you goin' to manage it this time?
He'll be drownded, and won't have nobody to blame for it but his own self.
I reckon that's a considerble sight better 'n killin' of him.
Yes, i reck'n you are.
But s'pose she don't break up and wash off?
Well, we can wait the two hours anyway and see, can't we?
All right, then come along.
So they started, and i lit out, all in a cold sweat, and scrambled forward.
I'll hunt the labboard side, you hunt the stabboard.
You start at the raft, and oh, my lordy, lordy!
Well, i catched my breath and most fainted.
Shut up on a wreck with such a gang as that!
But it warn't no time to be sentimentering.
We'd got to find that boat now had to have it for ourselves.
No sign of a boat.
So on we prowled again.
I could just barely see her.
I felt ever so thankful.
Then bill he come out and got in.
Packard says, in a low voice all ready shove off!
I couldn't hardly hang on to the shutters, i was so weak.
But bill says hold on 'd you go through him?
So he's got his share o' the cash yet.
Well, then, come along no use to take truck and leave money.
Say, won't he suspicion what we're up to?
But we got to have it anyway.
So they got out and went in.
I out with my knife and cut the rope, and away we went!
We didn't touch an oar, and we didn't speak nor whisper, nor hardly even breathe.
Then jim manned the oars, and we took out after our raft.
The rain poured down, and never a light showed everybody in bed, i reckon.
We boomed along down the river, watching for lights and watching for our raft.
It was the raft, and mighty glad was we to get aboard of it again.
We seen a light now away down to the right, on shore.
So i said i would go for it.
As i got down towards it three or four more showed up on a hillside.
I closed in above the shore light, and laid on my oars and floated.
I gave his shoulder two or three little shoves, and begun to cry.
I says pap, and mam, and sis, and then i broke down.
What's the matter with 'em?
They're they're are you the watchman of the boat?
Yes, he says, kind of pretty well satisfied like.
Why, there ain't but one.
What, you don't mean the walter scott?
What are they doin' there , for gracious sakes?
Well, they didn't go there a purpose.
Why, how in the nation did they ever git into such a scrape?
Miss hooker was a visiting up there to the town yes, booth's landing go on.
I most wish 't it had been me, i do.
It's the beatenest thing i ever struck.
And then what did you all do?
So pap said somebody got to get ashore and get help somehow.
There ain't no sense in it go for the steam ferry.
Do you reckon your pap why that's all right.
Miss hooker she tole me, particular , that her uncle hornback great guns!
And don't you fool around any, because he'll want to know the news.
Tell him i'll have his niece all safe before he can get to town.
I wished the widow knowed about it.
Well, before long here comes the wreck, dim and dusky, sliding along down!
A kind of cold shiver went through me, and then i struck out for her.
We hadn't ever been this rich before in neither of our lives.
He says i didn' know dey was so many un um.
How much do a king git?
En what dey got to do, huck?
But other times they just lazy around or go hawking just hawking and sp sh!
D' you hear a noise?
But mostly they hang round the harem.
The place where he keeps his wives.
Don't you know about the harem?
Solomon had one he had about a million wives.
Why, yes, dat's so i i'd done forgot it.
A harem's a bo'd'n house, i reck'n.
Mos' likely dey has rackety times in de nussery.
En i reck'n de wives quarrels considable en dat 'crease de racket.
Yit dey say sollermun de wises' man dat ever live'.
I doan' take no stock in dat.
I doan k'yer what de widder say, he warn't no wise man nuther.
He had some er de dad fetchedes' ways i ever see.
Does you know 'bout dat chile dat he 'uz gwyne to chop in two?
Yes, the widow told me all about it.
Warn' dat de beatenes' notion in de worl'?
You jes' take en look at it a minute.
Bofe un you claims it.
Dat's de way sollermun was gwyne to do wid de chile.
Now i want to ast you what's de use er dat half a bill?
Can't buy noth'n wid it.
En what use is a half a chile?
I wouldn' give a dern for a million un um.
Doan' talk to me 'bout yo' pints.
Doan' talk to me 'bout sollermun, huck, i knows him by de back.
But i tell you you don't get the point.
I reck'n i knows what i knows.
En mine you, de real pint is down furder it's down deeper.
It lays in de way sollermun was raised.
No, he ain't he can't 'ford it.
He know how to value 'em.
He as soon chop a chile in two as a cat.
A chile er two, mo' er less, warn't no consekens to sollermun, dad fatch him!
I never see such a nigger.
He was the most down on solomon of any nigger i ever see.
So i went to talking about other kings, and let solomon slide.
But some says he got out and got away, and come to america.
But he'll be pooty lonesome dey ain' no kings here, is dey, huck?
Den he cain't git no situation.
What he gwyne to do?
Why, huck, doan' de french people talk de same way we does?
No , jim you couldn't understand a word they said not a single word.
Well, now, i be ding busted!
I don't know but it's so.
I got some of their jabber out of a book.
I wouldn't 'low no nigger to call me dat.
Shucks, it ain't calling you anything.
It's only saying, do you know how to talk french?
Well, den, why couldn't he say it?
Why, he is a saying it.
That's a frenchman's way of saying it.
Dey ain' no sense in it.
Looky here, jim does a cat talk like we do?
No, a cow don't, nuther.
Does a cat talk like a cow, or a cow talk like a cat?
It's natural and right for 'em to talk different from each other, ain't it?
Why, mos' sholy it is.
Is a cat a man, huck?
Well, den, dey ain't no sense in a cat talkin' like a man.
Is a cow a man?
Er is a cow a cat?
No, she ain't either of them.
Is a frenchman a man?
Dad blame it, why doan' he talk like a man?
You answer me dat !
I see it warn't no use wasting words you can't learn a nigger to argue.
I was in such a hurry i hadn't untied her.
Away down there somewheres i hears a small whoop, and up comes my spirits.
I went tearing after it, listening sharp to hear it again.
Well, i fought along, and directly i hears the whoop behind me.
I was tangled good now.
That was somebody else's whoop, or else i was turned around.
I throwed the paddle down.
In another second or two it was solid white and still again.
I just give up then.
I knowed what the matter was.
That cut bank was an island, and jim had gone down t'other side of it.
It warn't no towhead that you could float by in ten minutes.
I kept quiet, with my ears cocked, about fifteen minutes, i reckon.
How that snag's tearing along.
I looked away down stream, and seen a black speck on the water.
So she'd had a rough time.
Why didn't you stir me up?
Goodness gracious, is dat you, huck?
En you ain' dead you ain' drownded you's back agin?
It's too good for true, honey, it's too good for true.
Lemme look at you chile, lemme feel o' you.
What's the matter with you, jim?
Has i ben a drinkin'?
Has i had a chance to be a drinkin'?
Well, then, what makes you talk so wild?
How does i talk wild?
Huck huck finn, you look me in de eye look me in de eye.
Hain't you ben gone away?
Why, what in the nation do you mean?
I hain't been gone anywheres.
Where would i go to?
Well, looky here, boss, dey's sumf'n wrong, dey is.
Is i me , or who is i?
Is i heah, or whah is i?
Now dat's what i wants to know.
I hain't see no tow head.
You hain't seen no towhead?
De fog dat's been aroun' all night.
Now ain' dat so, boss ain't it so?
Well, this is too many for me, jim.
I hain't seen no fog, nor no islands, nor no troubles, nor nothing.
You couldn't a got drunk in that time, so of course you've been dreaming.
Dad fetch it, how is i gwyne to dream all dat in ten minutes?
Well, hang it all, you did dream it, because there didn't any of it happen.
I know, because i've been here all the time.
Jim didn't say nothing for about five minutes, but set there studying over it.
En i hain't ever had no dream b'fo' dat's tired me like dis one.
Oh, well, that's all right, because a dream does tire a body like everything sometimes.
But this one was a staving dream tell me all about it, jim.
It was the leaves and rubbish on the raft and the smashed oar.
You could see them first rate now.
I'se gwyne to tell you.
There was a power of style about her.
It amounted to something being a raftsman on such a craft as that.
Jim said if the two big rivers joined together there, that would show.
That disturbed jim and me too.
So the question was, what to do?
Every little while he jumps up and says dah she is?
I couldn't get that out of my conscience, no how nor no way.
But now it did and it stayed with me, and scorched me more and more.
That was so i couldn't get around that noway.
That was where it pinched.
I got to feeling so mean and so miserable i most wished i was dead.
We neither of us could keep still.
Every time he danced around and says, dah's cairo!
Jim talked out loud all the time while i was talking to myself.
It most froze me to hear such talk.
He wouldn't ever dared to talk such talk in his life before.
Thinks i, this is what comes of my not thinking.
I was sorry to hear jim say that, it was such a lowering of him.
I felt easy and happy and light as a feather right off.
All my troubles was gone.
I went to looking out sharp for a light, and sort of singing to myself.
By and by one showed.
Jim sings out we's safe, huck, we's safe!
Jump up and crack yo' heels!
Dat's de good ole cairo at las', i jis knows it!
I says i'll take the canoe and go and see, jim.
It mightn't be, you know.
Well, i just felt sick.
But i says, i got to do it i can't get out of it.
One of them says what's that yonder?
A piece of a raft, i says.
Do you belong on it?
Is your man white or black?
I didn't answer up prompt.
I tried to, but the words wouldn't come.
I reckon we'll go and see for ourselves.
He's sick and so is mam and mary ann.
We're in a hurry, boy.
But i s'pose we've got to.
Come, buckle to your paddle, and let's get along.
I buckled to my paddle and they laid to their oars.
Say, boy, what's the matter with your father?
It's the a the well, it ain't anything much.
It warn't but a mighty little ways to the raft now.
One says boy, that's a lie.
What is the matter with your pap?
Answer up square now, and it'll be the better for you.
I will, sir, i will, honest but don't leave us, please.
Set her back, john, set her back!
Keep away, boy keep to looard.
Confound it, i just expect the wind has blowed it to us.
Your pap's got the small pox, and you know it precious well.
Why didn't you come out and say so?
Do you want to spread it all over?
Poor devil, there's something in that.
Look here, i'll tell you what to do.
Don't you try to land by yourself, or you'll smash everything to pieces.
Don't be a fool again, and let people guess what is the matter.
I feel mighty mean to leave you but my kingdom!
It won't do to fool with small pox, don't you see?
Good bye, boy you do as mr. parker told you, and you'll be all right.
That's so, my boy good bye, good bye.
No, says i, i'd feel bad i'd feel just the same way i do now.
I went into the wigwam jim warn't there.
I looked all around he warn't anywhere.
Is dey out o' sight yit?
He was in the river under the stern oar, with just his nose out.
I told him they were out of sight, so he come aboard.
Den i was gwyne to swim to de raf' agin when dey was gone.
But lawsy, how you did fool 'em, huck!
Dat wuz de smartes' dodge!
Then we talked about the money.
It was a pretty good raise twenty dollars apiece.
Towards daybreak we tied up, and jim was mighty particular about hiding the raft good.
I went off in the canoe to ask about it.
I ranged up and says mister, is that town cairo?
You must be a blame' fool.
What town is it, mister?
If you want to know, go and find out.
I paddled to the raft.
No high ground about cairo, jim said.
I begun to suspicion something.
I says maybe we went by cairo in the fog that night.
He says doan' le's talk about it, huck.
Po' niggers can't have no luck.
I awluz 'spected dat rattlesnake skin warn't done wid its work.
It ain't yo' fault, huck you didn' know.
Don't you blame yo'self 'bout it.
So it was all up with cairo.
We talked it all over.
We didn't say a word for a good while.
There warn't anything to say.
So we shoved out after dark on the raft.
The place to buy canoes is off of rafts laying up at shore.
You can't tell the shape of the river, and you can't see no distance.
We lit the lantern, and judged she would see it.
She aimed right for us.
Then i bounced for the top in a hurry, for i was nearly busting.
I made a safe landing, and clumb up the bank.
I don't want nothing, sir.
I only want to go along by, but the dogs won't let me.
What are you prowling around here this time of night for hey?
I warn't prowling around, sir, i fell overboard off of the steamboat.
Oh, you did, did you?
Strike a light there, somebody.
What did you say your name was?
Look here, if you're telling the truth you needn't be afraid nobody'll hurt you.
But don't try to budge stand right where you are.
Rouse out bob and tom, some of you, and fetch the guns.
George jackson, is there anybody with you?
I heard the people stirring around in the house now, and see a light.
Put it on the floor behind the front door.
Bob, if you and tom are ready, take your places.
Now, george jackson, do you know the shepherdsons?
No, sir i never heard of them.
Well, that may be so, and it mayn't.
And mind, don't you hurry come mighty slow.
Come slow push the door open yourself just enough to squeeze in, d' you hear?
I didn't hurry i couldn't if i'd a wanted to.
The dogs were as still as the humans, but they followed a little behind me.
I done it, but i judged they would take it off.
The old gentleman says there i reckon it's all right.
True for you, rachel i forgot.
He hadn't on anything but a shirt, and he was very frowzy headed.
He says ain't they no shepherdsons around?
They said, no, 'twas a false alarm.
Well, he says, if they'd a ben some, i reckon i'd a got one.
Go 'long with you now, and do as your mother told you.
I said i didn't know i hadn't heard about it before, no way.
How'm i going to guess, says i, when i never heard tell of it before?
But you can guess, can't you?
Why, any candle, he says.
I don't know where he was, says i where was he?
Why, he was in the dark !
Well, if you knowed where he was, what did you ask me for?
Why, blame it, it's a riddle, don't you see?
Say, how long are you going to stay here?
You got to stay always.
We can just have booming times they don't have no school now.
Do you own a dog?
Do you like to comb up sundays, and all that kind of foolishness?
You bet i don't, but ma she makes me.
I reckon i'd better put 'em on, but i'd ruther not, it's so warm.
They all smoked and talked, and i eat and talked.
The young women had quilts around them, and their hair down their backs.
So they said i could have a home there as long as i wanted it.
All right, says i, go ahead.
G e o r g e j a x o n there now, he says.
Well, says i, you done it, but i didn't think you could.
It ain't no slouch of a name to spell right off without studying.
It was a mighty nice family, and a mighty nice house, too.
They had big brass dog irons that could hold up a saw log.
They wouldn't took any money for her.
There was a couple of big wild turkey wing fans spread out behind those things.
It come all the way from philadelphia, they said.
There was some books, too, piled up perfectly exact, on each corner of the table.
One was a big family bible full of pictures.
One was pilgrim's progress, about a man that left his family, it didn't say why.
I read considerable in it now and then.
The statements was interesting, but tough.
There was a hymn book, and a lot of other books.
They was different from any pictures i ever see before blacker, mostly, than is common.
Other times it was hid with a little curtain.
It was very good poetry.
And did the sad hearts thicken, and did the mourners cry?
Then list with tearful eye, whilst i his fate do tell.
His soul did from this cold world fly by falling down a well.
Buck said she could rattle off poetry like nothing.
She didn't ever have to stop to think.
And warn't the cooking good, and just bushels of it too!
Col. grangerford was a gentleman, you see.
He was a gentleman all over and so was his family.
He carried a mahogany cane with a silver head to it.
There warn't no frivolishness about him, not a bit, and he warn't ever loud.
So was her sister, miss sophia, but it was a different kind.
She was gentle and sweet like a dove, and she was only twenty.
Each person had their own nigger to wait on them buck too.
The old gentleman owned a lot of farms and over a hundred niggers.
These people was mostly kinfolks of the family.
The men brought their guns with them.
It was a handsome lot of quality, i tell you.
We was crossing the road.
We done it, and then peeped down the woods through the leaves.
He had his gun across his pommel.
I had seen him before.
It was young harney shepherdson.
He grabbed his gun and rode straight to the place where we was hid.
We started through the woods on a run.
We never stopped running till we got home.
Why didn't you step into the road, my boy?
The two young men looked dark, but never said nothing.
Well, i bet i did.
What did he do to you?
He never done nothing to me.
Well, then, what did you want to kill him for?
Why, nothing only it's on account of the feud.
Why, where was you raised?
Don't you know what a feud is?
Never heard of it before tell me about it.
But it's kind of slow, and takes a long time.
Has this one been going on long, buck?
Well, i should reckon !
It started thirty year ago, or som'ers along there.
What was the trouble about, buck?
I reckon maybe i don't know.
Well, who done the shooting?
Was it a grangerford or a shepherdson?
Laws, how do i know?
It was so long ago.
Has there been many killed, buck?
Yes right smart chance of funerals.
But they don't always kill.
Bob's been carved up some with a bowie, and tom's been hurt once or twice.
Has anybody been killed this year, buck?
Yes we got one and they got one.
I reckon that old man was a coward, buck.
I reckon he warn't a coward.
Not by a blame' sight.
There ain't a coward amongst them shepherdsons not a one.
And there ain't no cowards amongst the grangerfords either.
Next sunday we all went to church, about three mile, everybody a horseback.
The shepherdsons done the same.
Buck and a dog was stretched out on the grass in the sun sound asleep.
I went up to our room, and judged i would take a nap myself.
I ransacked it, but couldn't find anything else.
Thinks i, that's mighty curious he said that yesterday.
What is he up to, anyway?
So i says all right trot ahead.
I's seed 'm befo' i don't k'yer to see 'em no mo'.
Then he slopped right along and went away, and pretty soon the trees hid him.
He nearly cried he was so glad, but he warn't surprised.
Why didn't you tell my jack to fetch me here sooner, jim?
You mean to say our old raft warn't smashed all to flinders?
Why, how did you get hold of the raft again, jim did you catch her?
How i gwyne to ketch her en i out in de woods?
Dat jack's a good nigger, en pooty smart.
If anything happens he ain't mixed up in it.
He can say he never seen us together, and it 'll be the truth.
I don't want to talk much about the next day.
I reckon i'll cut it pretty short.
Next i noticed that buck was up and gone.
Thinks i, what does it mean?
Says he don't you know, mars jawge?
No, says i, i don't.
Well, den, miss sophia's run off!
Sich another hurryin' up guns en hosses you never see!
I reck'n dey's gwyne to be mighty rough times.
Buck went off 'thout waking me up.
Well, i reck'n he did !
Dey warn't gwyne to mix you up in it.
I took up the river road as hard as i could put.
By and by i begin to hear guns a good ways off.
By and by the men stopped cavorting around and yelling.
They got half way to the tree i was in before the men noticed.
Then the men see them, and jumped on their horses and took out after them.
The men ripped around awhile, and then rode away.
I wished i was out of that tree, but i dasn't come down.
Said the shepherdsons laid for them in ambush.
I asked him what was become of young harney and miss sophia.
He said they'd got across the river and was safe.
All of a sudden, bang!
It made me so sick i most fell out of the tree.
I wished i hadn't ever come ashore that night to see such things.
I stayed in the tree till it begun to get dark, afraid to come down.
It was just dark now.
My souls, but i was scared!
I couldn't get my breath for most a minute.
Then i raised a yell.
A voice not twenty five foot from me says good lan'!
It was jim's voice nothing ever sounded so good before.
He says laws bless you, chile, i 'uz right down sho' you's dead agin.
Lawsy, i's mighty glad to git you back again, honey.
We said there warn't no home like a raft, after all.
Other places do seem so cramped up and smothery, but a raft don't.
You feel mighty free and easy and comfortable on a raft.
Here is the way we put in the time.
Then we set out the lines.
It had took all that time to come over the water.
So we would put in the day, lazying around, listening to the stillness.
Sometimes we'd have that whole river all to ourselves for the longest time.
It's lovely to live on a raft.
We used to watch the stars that fell, too, and see them streak down.
Jim allowed they'd got spoiled and was hove out of the nest.
They wanted to jump right in, but i says don't you do it.
The other fellow was about thirty, and dressed about as ornery.
What got you into trouble?
Says the baldhead to t'other chap.
So i told you i was expecting trouble myself, and would scatter out with you.
That's the whole yarn what's yourn?
I didn't wait for no breakfast i warn't hungry.
I've done considerble in the doctoring way in my time.
Preachin's my line, too, and workin' camp meetin's, and missionaryin' around.
What 're you alassin' about?
And he begun to wipe the corner of his eye with a rag.
Dern your skin, ain't the company good enough for you?
Says the baldhead, pretty pert and uppish.
I don't blame you , gentlemen far from it i don't blame anybody.
He went on a wiping.
No, i know you haven't.
I ain't blaming you, gentlemen.
I brought myself down yes, i did it myself.
It's right i should suffer perfectly right i don't make any moan.
Brought you down from whar?
Whar was you brought down from?
The secret of my birth the secret of your birth!
By rights i am a duke!
Jim's eyes bugged out when he heard that and i reckon mine did, too.
Then the baldhead says no!
Jim pitied him ever so much, and so did i.
Well, that was all easy, so we done it.
And so on, and a body could see it was mighty pleasing to him.
You ain't the only person that's ben snaked down wrongfully out'n a high place.
No, you ain't the only person that's had a secret of his birth.
And, by jings, he begins to cry.
Bilgewater, kin i trust you?
Says the old man, still sort of sobbing.
Bilgewater, i am the late dauphin!
You bet you, jim and me stared this time.
Then the duke says you are what?
This done him heaps of good, and so he got cheerful and comfortable.
It 'll only make things oncomfortable.
Make the best o' things the way you find 'em, says i that's my motto.
The duke done it, and jim and me was pretty glad to see it.
Would a runaway nigger run south ?
No, they allowed he wouldn't.
That warn't enough to take us fourteen hundred mile, deck passage nor no other way.
We don't run daytimes no more now nights they don't bother us.
I'll think the thing over i'll invent a plan that'll fix it.
Well, the duke allowed he would take my bed but the king allowed he wouldn't.
Your grace 'll take the shuck bed yourself.
Misfortune has broken my once haughty spirit i yield, i submit 'tis my fate.
I am alone in the world let me suffer can bear it.
We got away as soon as it was good and dark.
My souls, how the wind did scream along!
It most killed jim a laughing.
He was the easiest nigger to laugh that ever was, anyway.
The duke said that was him .
By and by he says but the histrionic muse is the darling.
Have you ever trod the boards, royalty?
You shall, then, before you're three days older, fallen grandeur, says the duke.
And the balcony scene in romeo and juliet.
How does that strike you?
I was too small when pap used to have 'em at the palace.
Do you reckon you can learn me?
I'm jist a freezn' for something fresh, anyway.
No, don't you worry these country jakes won't ever think of that.
Here are the costumes for the parts.
And t'other chap, and a long white cotton nightshirt and a ruffled nightcap to match.
The king allowed he would go, too, and see if he couldn't strike something.
The duke said what he was after was a printing office.
The duke shed his coat and said he was all right now.
So me and the king lit out for the camp meeting.
There was as much as a thousand people there from twenty mile around.
They didn't have no backs.
The preachers had high platforms to stand on at one end of the sheds.
The first shed we come to the preacher was lining out a hymn.
Look upon it and live!
And people would shout out, glory!
Come, lame and halt and blind!
Come, pore and needy, sunk in shame!
Come, all that's worn and soiled and suffering!
Come with a broken spirit!
Come with a contrite heart!
Come in your rags and sin and dirt!
And then he busted into tears, and so did everybody.
Then somebody sings out, take up a collection for him, take up a collection!
Then everybody said it, the preacher too.
The reading was all about jim, and just described him to a dot.
No, i says, i reckon not.
Well, says he, dat's all right, den.
I doan' mine one er two kings, but dat's enough.
Dis one's powerful drunk, en de duke ain' much better.
It was after sun up now, but we went right on and didn't tie up.
And the way they laid on and pranced around the raft was grand to see.
We want a little something to answer encores with, anyway.
Hamlet's soliloquy, you know the most celebrated thing in shakespeare.
It was beautiful to see him.
By and by he got it.
He told us to give attention.
There's the respect must give us pause wake duncan with thy knocking!
Tis a consummation devoutly to be wished.
But soft you, the fair ophelia ope not thy ponderous and marble jaws.
But get thee to a nunnery mdash go!
The circus would leave before night, so our show would have a pretty good chance.
They read like this shaksperean revival!!!
Assisted by the whole strength of the company!
New costumes, new scenery, new appointments!
Also the thrilling, masterly, and blood curdling broad sword conflict in richard iii.!!!
For one night only, on account of imperative european engagements!
Then we went loafing around the town.
There was generly hogs in the garden, and people driving them out.
All the stores was along one street.
Cain't i hain't got but one chaw left.
So did your sister's cat's grandmother.
Well, i did pay you back some of it wunst.
Yes, you did 'bout six chaws.
You borry'd store tobacker and paid back nigger head.
Store tobacco is flat black plug, but these fellows mostly chaws the natural leaf twisted.
The hogs loafed and grunted around everywheres.
And pretty soon you'd hear a loafer sing out, hi!
Then they'd settle back again till there was a dog fight.
The people had moved out of them.
Families fetched their dinners with them from the country, and eat them in the wagons.
There was considerable whisky drinking going on, and i seen three fights.
By and by somebody sings out here comes old boggs!
In from the country for his little old monthly drunk here he comes, boys!
One of them says wonder who he's a gwyne to chaw up this time.
I'm on the waw path, and the price uv coffins is a gwyne to raise.
He see me, and rode up and says whar'd you come f'm, boy?
He's the best naturedest old fool in arkansaw never hurt nobody, drunk nor sober.
Come out and meet the man you've swindled.
You're the houn' i'm after, and i'm a gwyne to have you, too!
Till one o'clock, mind no longer.
Then he turns and goes in.
The crowd looked mighty sober nobody stirred, and there warn't no more laughing.
But it didn't do no good.
By and by somebody says go for his daughter!
Quick, go for his daughter sometimes he'll listen to her.
If anybody can persuade him, she can.
So somebody started on a run.
I walked down street a ways and stopped.
In about five or ten minutes here comes boggs again, but not on his horse.
I looked over there to see who said it, and it was that colonel sherburn.
Boggs throws up both of his hands and says, o lord, don't shoot!
Goes the first shot, and he staggers back, clawing at the air bang!
Give him air, give him air!
Then they pulled his daughter away from him, screaming and crying, and took her off.
She was about sixteen, and very sweet and gentle looking, but awful pale and scared.
The streets was full, and everybody was excited.
And then fetched his cane down slow to a level, and says bang!
Again, and fell down flat on his back.
Then as much as a dozen people got out their bottles and treated him.
Well, by and by somebody said sherburn ought to be lynched.
Lots of the women and girls was crying and taking on, scared most to death.
It was a little twenty foot yard.
Some sung out tear down the fence!
The racket stopped, and the wave sucked back.
Sherburn never said a word just stood there, looking down.
The stillness was awful creepy and uncomfortable.
Then he says, slow and scornful the idea of you lynching anybody!
The idea of you thinking you had pluck enough to lynch a man !
I know you clear through.
The average man's a coward.
Why don't your juries hang murderers?
You didn't want to come.
The average man don't like trouble and danger.
You don't like trouble and danger.
But if only half a man like buck harkness, there shouts 'lynch him!
But a mob without any man at the head of it is beneath pitifulness.
I could a stayed if i wanted to, but i didn't want to.
You can't be too careful.
It was a real bully circus.
It was a powerful fine sight i never see anything so lovely.
Why, i couldn't a thought of them in a year.
And one or two women begun to scream.
So everybody laughed and said all right, and the man got on.
And the horse a going like a house afire too.
Why, it was one of his own men!
He said he could size their style.
The bills said chapter xxiii.
Well, it would make a cow laugh to see the shines that old idiot cut.
Twenty people sings out what, is it over?
Then there was a fine time.
And rose up mad, and was a going for that stage and them tragedians.
But a big, fine looking man jumps up on a bench and shouts hold on!
We are sold mighty badly sold.
Then we'll all be in the same boat.
All right, then not a word about any sell.
Go along home, and advise everybody to come and see the tragedy.
Next day you couldn't hear nothing around that town but how splendid that show was.
House was jammed again that night, and we sold this crowd the same way.
I done it, and he done the same.
He hadn't been up town at all.
We never showed a light till we was about ten mile below the village.
The duke says greenhorns, flatheads!
I would just like to know how they're putting in their opportunity.
They can turn it into a picnic if they want to they brought plenty provisions.
Them rapscallions took in four hundred and sixty five dollars in that three nights.
I never see money hauled in by the wagon load like that before.
No, i says, it don't.
Well, it don't, because it's in the breed.
I reckon they're all alike.
You read about them once you'll see.
Look at henry the eight this 'n 's a sunday school superintendent to him .
My, you ought to seen old henry the eight when he was in bloom.
And he would do it just as indifferent as if he was ordering up eggs.
Fetch up nell gwynn,' he says.
Next morning, 'chop off her head!
And they chop it off.
Fair rosamun answers the bell.
Next morning, 'chop off her head.
How does he go at it give notice?
Give the country a show?
That was his style he never give anybody a chance.
He had suspicions of his father, the duke of wellington.
Well, what did he do?
Ask him to show up?
No drownded him in a butt of mamsey, like a cat.
S'pose people left money laying around where he was what did he do?
He always done the other thing.
S'pose he opened his mouth what then?
If he didn't shut it up powerful quick he'd lose a lie every time.
All i say is, kings is kings, and you got to make allowances.
Take them all around, they're a mighty ornery lot.
It's the way they're raised.
But dis one do smell so like de nation, huck.
Well, they all do, jim.
We can't help the way a king smells history don't tell no way.
Now de duke, he's a tolerble likely man in some ways.
This one's a middling hard lot for a duke.
When he's drunk there ain't no near sighted man could tell him from a king.
Well, anyways, i doan' hanker for no mo' un um, huck.
Dese is all i kin stan'.
It's the way i feel, too, jim.
Sometimes i wish we could hear of a country that's out of kings.
What was the use to tell jim these warn't real kings and dukes?
I went to sleep, and jim didn't call me when it was my turn.
I didn't take notice nor let on.
I knowed what it was about.
It don't seem natural, but i reckon it's so.
He was a mighty good nigger, jim was.
She never done it jis' stood dah, kiner smilin' up at me.
She jis stood de same way, kiner smilin' up.
I says 'i lay i make you mine!
My, but i wuz mad!
En my lan', de chile never move'!
Jis' as loud as i could yell.
He was uncommon bright, the duke was, and he soon struck it.
Blamed if he warn't the horriblest looking outrage i ever see.
Why, he didn't only look like he was dead, he looked considerable more than that.
I done it, of course.
The king's duds was all black, and he did look real swell and starchy.
I never knowed how clothes could change a body before.
Jim cleaned up the canoe, and i got my paddle ready.
Go for the steamboat, huckleberry we'll come down to the village on her.
I didn't have to be ordered twice to go and take a steamboat ride.
Run her nose in shore, says the king.
Wher' you bound for, young man?
For the steamboat going to orleans.
Git aboard, says the king.
Hold on a minute, my servant 'll he'p you with them bags.
Jump out and he'p the gentleman, adolphus meaning me, i see.
I done so, and then we all three started on again.
You ain't him, are you?
Did anybody send 'em word?
And that letter was all they could get him to put a pen to.
Why do you reckon harvey don't come?
Oh, he lives in england sheffield preaches there hasn't ever been in this country.
Too bad, too bad he couldn't a lived to see his brothers, poor soul.
You going to orleans, you say?
Yes, but that ain't only a part of it.
I'm going in a ship, next wednesday, for ryo janeero, where my uncle lives.
It's a pretty long journey.
But it'll be lovely wisht i was a going.
Is mary jane the oldest?
How old is the others?
To be left alone in the cold world so.
Well, they could be worse off.
Old peter had friends, and they ain't going to let them come to no harm.
Because she's a big orleans boat, and i was afeard she mightn't stop there.
When they're deep they won't stop for a hail.
A cincinnati boat will, but this is a st. louis one.
Was peter wilks well off?
Oh, yes, pretty well off.
When did you say he died?
I didn't say, but it was last night.
Yes, 'bout the middle of the day.
Well, it's all terrible sad but we've all got to go, one time or another.
So what we want to do is to be prepared then we're all right.
Yes, sir, it's the best way.
Ma used to always say that.
The king never said nothing about going aboard, so i lost my ride, after all.
And if he's gone over to t'other side, go over there and git him.
And tell him to git himself up regardless.
I see what he was up to but i never said nothing, of course.
Then he says how are you on the deef and dumb, bilgewater?
So then they waited for a steamboat.
But the king was ca'm.
If they warn't the beatenest lot, them two frauds, that ever i struck.
Well, if ever i struck anything like it, i'm a nigger.
It was enough to make a body ashamed of the human race.
I never see anything so disgusting.
Lawyer bell was away up to louisville on business.
My, the way the king's eyes did shine!
He slaps the duke on the shoulder and says oh, this ain't bully nor noth'n!
Oh, no, i reckon not!
Why, bully , it beats the nonesuch, don't it?
The duke allowed it did.
Thish yer comes of trust'n to providence.
It's the best way, in the long run.
I've tried 'em all, and ther' ain't no better way.
So they counts it, and it comes out four hundred and fifteen dollars short.
They worried over that awhile, and ransacked all around for it.
The best way's to let it go, and keep still about it.
Oh, shucks, yes, we can spare it.
I don't k'yer noth'n 'bout that it's the count i'm thinkin' about.
We want to be awful square and open and above board here, you know.
It most busted them, but they made up the six thousand clean and clear.
Say, says the duke, i got another idea.
Good land, duke, lemme hug you!
It's the most dazzling idea 'at ever a man struck.
You have cert'nly got the most astonishin' head i ever see.
Oh, this is the boss dodge, ther' ain't no mistake 'bout it.
Everybody looked hungry at it, and licked their chops.
Ther' ain't no question 'bout it in my mind.
If i know william and i think i do he well, i'll jest ask him.
Here, mary jane, susan, joanner, take the money take it all .
It's the gift of him that lays yonder, cold but joyful.
But he needn't a worried it was jest what i was at.
Obsequies ain't used in england no more now it's gone out.
We say orgies now in england.
Orgies is better, because it means the thing you're after more exact.
So, you see, funeral orgies is an open er public funeral.
He was the worst i ever struck.
Well, the iron jawed man he laughed right in his face.
Everybody says, why, doctor !
And abner shackleford says why, robinson, hain't you heard the news?
I keep your hands off of me!
You talk like an englishman, don't you?
It's the worst imitation i ever heard.
You're a fraud, that's what you are!
Well, how they all took on!
Mary jane wilks, you know me for your friend, and for your unselfish friend, too.
Now listen to me turn this pitiful rascal out i beg you to do it.
Mary jane straightened herself up, and my, but she was handsome!
She says here is my answer.
The doctor says all right i wash my hands of the matter.
The king said the cubby would do for his valley meaning me.
The duke's room was pretty small, but plenty good enough, and so was my cubby.
And where, for the land's sake, did you get these amaz'n pickles?
She says did you ever see the king?
Well, i bet i have he goes to our church.
I knowed he was dead years ago, but i never let on.
So when i says he goes to our church, she says what regular?
His pew's right over opposite ourn on t'other side the pulpit.
I thought he lived in london?
But i thought you lived in sheffield?
I see i was up a stump.
Then i says i mean he goes to our church regular when he's in sheffield.
That's only in the summer time, when he comes there to take the sea baths.
Why, how you talk sheffield ain't on the sea.
Well, who said it was?
I never said nothing of the kind.
Well, what did you say, then?
Said he come to take the sea baths that's what i said.
Looky here, i says did you ever see any congress water?
Well, did you have to go to congress to get it?
How does he get it, then?
Gets it the way people down here gets congress water in barrels.
There in the palace at sheffield they've got furnaces, and he wants his water hot.
They can't bile that amount of water away off there at the sea.
They haven't got no conveniences for it.
You might a said that in the first place and saved time.
Next, she says do you go to church, too?
Why, ourn your uncle harvey's.
What does he want with a pew?
Wants it to set in.
What did you reckon he wanted with it?
Why, i thought he'd be in the pulpit.
Rot him, i forgot he was a preacher.
Why, what do they want with more?
To preach before a king?
I never did see such a girl as you.
They don't have no less than seventeen.
It must take 'em a week.
Shucks, they don't all of 'em preach the same day only one of 'em.
Well, then, what does the rest of 'em do?
Loll around, pass the plate and one thing or another.
But mainly they don't do nothing.
Well, then, what are they for ?
Why, they're for style .
Well, i don't want to know no such foolishness as that.
How is servants treated in england?
Do they treat 'em better 'n we treat our niggers?
A servant ain't nobody there.
They treat them worse than dogs.
A body could tell you hain't ever been to england by that.
But you always went to church.
Well, i was gone up again.
I forgot i was the old man's servant.
She says honest injun, now, hain't you been telling me a lot of lies?
None of it at all?
None of it at all.
Not a lie in it, says i.
Lay your hand on this book and say it.
What is it you won't believe, joe?
Says mary jane, stepping in with susan behind her.
How would you like to be treated so?
That's always your way, maim always sailing in to help somebody before they're hurt.
I hain't done nothing to him.
I reckon he can stand a little thing like that, can't he?
All right, then, says the other girls you just ask his pardon.
She done it, too and she done it beautiful.
So then i lit out for bed, i said, meaning some time or another.
When i got by myself i went to thinking the thing over.
Shall i go, private, and tell mary jane?
No i dasn't do it.
No there ain't no good way but one.
So, thinks i, i'll go and search them rooms.
So i judged i'd got to do the other thing lay for them and eavesdrop.
Then i was glad i hadn't found the bed when i wanted it.
They sets down then, and the king says well, what is it?
Well, this is it, capet.
I ain't easy i ain't comfortable.
That doctor lays on my mind.
I wanted to know your plans.
I've got a notion, and i think it's a sound one.
I'm for knocking off and lighting out.
That made me feel pretty bad.
And not sell out the rest o' the property?
And all good, salable stuff, too.
We sha'n't rob 'em of nothing at all but jest this money.
They ain't a goin to suffer.
Why, jest think there's thous'n's and thous'n's that ain't nigh so well off.
Bless you, they ain't got noth'n' to complain of.
But the king says cuss the doctor!
What do we k'yer for him ?
Hain't we got all the fools in town on our side?
And ain't that a big enough majority in any town?
So they got ready to go down stairs again.
The duke says i don't think we put that money in a good place.
I had it out of there before they was half way down stairs.
I crept to their doors and listened they was snoring.
So i tiptoed along, and got down stairs all right.
There warn't a sound anywheres.
Just then i heard somebody coming down the stairs, back behind me.
The person coming was mary jane.
There warn't nobody around but the family and the widow bartley and our tribe.
I watched their faces to see if anything had been happening, but i couldn't tell.
Then he took his place over against the wall.
It was right down awkward, and nobody didn't seem to know what to do.
Then he drooped down and glided along the wall again to his place.
There warn't no more popular man in town than what that undertaker was.
I was in a sweat then, and watched him pretty keen.
I didn't know whether the money was in there or not.
So, says i, s'pose somebody has hogged that bag on the sly?
Now how do i know whether to write to mary jane or not?
S'pose she dug him up and didn't find nothing, what would she think of me?
But nothing come of it the faces didn't tell me nothing.
Next day was auction day.
The king says was you in my room night before last?
Was you in there yisterday er last night?
Honor bright, now no lies.
Honor bright, your majesty, i'm telling you the truth.
The duke says have you seen anybody else go in there?
No, your grace, not as i remember, i believe.
Then the duke says what, all of them?
It was the day we had the funeral.
It warn't early, because i overslept.
I was just starting down the ladder, and i see them.
Well, go on, go on!
And they didn't act anyway much, as fur as i see.
Great guns, this is a go!
Says the king and both of them looked pretty sick and tolerable silly.
They let on to be sorry they was going out of this region!
And i believed they was sorry, and so did you, and so did everybody.
Don't ever tell me any more that a nigger ain't got any histrionic talent.
Why, the way they played that thing it would fool anybody .
In my opinion, there's a fortune in 'em.
Yes, and ain't privileged to sing the song yet.
Say, where is that song that draft?
In the bank for to be collected.
Well, that's all right then, thank goodness.
Says i, kind of timid like is something gone wrong?
The king whirls on me and rips out none o' your business!
You keep your head shet, and mind y'r own affairs if you got any.
Long as you're in this town don't you forgit that you hear?
It's a good business yes.
By and by it was getting up time.
I felt awful bad to see it of course anybody would.
And it was the niggers i just expected it.
But they will and inside of two weeks and i know it!
Laws, it was out before i could think!
So i went to studying it out.
I never see nothing like it.
She says i'll stay a year!
Then i come back and set down again, and says don't you holler.
Just set still and take it like a man.
There, now we're over the worst of it, you can stand the rest middling easy.
She says, and set right down again.
Don't mind what i said please don't you won't, now, will you?
You tell me what to do, and whatever you say i'll do it.
Well, we got to save him , hain't we?
Well, then, we won't blow on them.
Saying them words put a good idea in my head.
A little short of four miles right out in the country, back here.
Then you come out and spread the news around, and get these beats jailed.
Good, she says, i'll do it.
They sha'n't touch a hair of your head!
I could swear they was beats and bummers, that's all, though that's worth something.
I'll tell you how to find them.
Gimme a pencil and a piece of paper.
Put it away, and don't lose it.
And they'll come a biling, too.
I judged we had got everything fixed about right now.
So i says just let the auction go right along, and don't worry.
What did you reckon i wanted you to go at all for, miss mary?
Well, i never thought and come to think, i don't know.
Why, it's because you ain't one of these leather face people.
I don't want no better book than what your face is.
A body can set down and read it off like coarse print.
Yes, i'll go before breakfast i'll be glad to.
And leave my sisters with them?
Yes never mind about them.
They've got to stand it yet a while.
They might suspicion something if all of you was to go.
Well, then, it sha'n't be.
It was well enough to tell her so no harm in it.
Then i says there's one more thing that bag of money.
I wish i knowed, but i don't.
Where did you hide it?
Do you reckon that 'll do?
So i wrote i put it in the coffin.
It was in there when you was crying there, away in the night.
I was behind the door, and i was mighty sorry for you, miss mary jane.
But i bet she done it, just the same she was just that kind.
It sounds like flattery, but it ain't no flattery.
And when it comes to beauty and goodness, too she lays over them all.
They says there's several but it's the proctors, mainly.
That's the name, i says i most forgot it.
I'm sorry to say it, i says, but hanner's the very one.
My goodness, and she so well only last week!
It ain't no name for it.
Only think of that, now!
What's the matter with her?
I couldn't think of anything reasonable, right off that way, so i says mumps.
They don't set up with people that's got the mumps.
You better bet they do with these mumps.
It's a new kind, miss mary jane said.
How's it a new kind?
Because it's mixed up with other things.
And they call it the mumps ?
That's what miss mary jane said.
Well, what in the nation do they call it the mumps for?
Why, because it is the mumps.
That's what it starts with.
Well, ther' ain't no sense in it.
Would ther' be any sense in that?
And ther' ain't no sense in this , nuther.
Is a harrow catching in the dark?
If you don't hitch on to one tooth, you're bound to on another, ain't you?
Well, it's awful, i think, says the hare lip.
I'll go to uncle harvey and oh, yes, i says, i would .
I wouldn't lose no time.
Just look at it a minute, and maybe you can see.
Hain't your uncles obleegd to get along home to england as fast as they can?
You know they'll wait for you.
Your uncle harvey's a preacher, ain't he?
Very well, then is a preacher going to deceive a steamboat clerk?
Is he going to deceive a ship clerk?
So as to get them to let miss mary jane go aboard?
Now you know he ain't.
What will he do, then?
Why, you talk like a muggins.
Well, anyway, maybe you'd better tell some of the neighbors.
You do beat all for natural stupidness.
Can't you see that they'd go and tell?
Ther' ain't no way but just to not tell anybody at all .
Well, maybe you're right yes, i judge you are right.
Yes, miss mary jane she wanted you to do that.
I mean the one that why, you must mean the apthorps, ain't it?
Everything was all right now.
And, my souls, how the people yelled and laughed, and kept it up.
I reckoned they'd turn pale.
But no, nary a pale did they turn.
Oh, he done it admirable.
That old gentleman that had just come looked all puzzled to death.
And mighty ingenious under the circumstances !
The day before the funeral, friend, says the king.
But what time o' day?
In the evenin' 'bout an hour er two before sundown.
I come down on the susan powell from cincinnati.
I warn't up at the pint in the mornin'.
Preacher be hanged, he's a fraud and a liar.
He was up at the pint that mornin'.
I live up there, don't i?
Well, i was up there, and he was up there.
He come in a canoe, along with tim collins and a boy.
I reckon i would, but i don't know.
Why, yonder he is, now.
I know him perfectly easy.
It was me he pointed at.
Come along, hines come along, the rest of you.
My servant here k'n tell you 'bout it, gentlemen.
The doctor and several said shucks!
And i see nobody didn't altogether believe him.
One man asked me if i see the niggers steal it.
That was all they asked me.
Then the doctor whirls on me and says are you english, too?
I says yes and him and some others laughed, and said, stuff!
And by and by they had me up to tell what i knowed.
You do it pretty awkward.
But he took the pen and wrote.
The old gentleman wrote, but nobody couldn't read it.
Nobody can read my hand but my brother there so he copies for me.
It's his hand you've got there, not mine.
Says the lawyer, this is a state of things.
Look at both, please they're by the same hand.
Well, what do you think?
That muleheaded old fool wouldn't give in then !
Said it warn't no fair test.
Yes, says somebody, me and ab turner done it.
Says i to myself, now he'll throw up the sponge there ain't no more use.
A body can't hardly believe it, but he didn't.
Anyway, he set there, and pretty soon he begun to smile, and says mf!
It's a very tough question, ain't it!
Yes , sir, i k'n tell you what's tattooed on his breast.
Now what do you say hey?
Well, i never see anything like that old blister for clean out and out cheek.
Was there any such mark on peter wilks' breast?
Both of them spoke up and says we didn't see no such mark.
Come, ain't that what you saw?
Both of them spoke up again, and says no, we didn't .
We never seen any marks at all.
Le's ride 'em on a rail!
And everybody was whooping at once, and there was a rattling powwow.
But the lawyer he jumps on the table and yells, and says gentlemen gentle men!
Hear me just a word just a single word if you please !
There's one way yet let's go and dig up the corpse and look.
Collar all these four men and the boy, and fetch them along, too!
They all shouted and if we don't find them marks we'll lynch the whole gang!
I was scared, now, i tell you.
But there warn't no getting away, you know.
She was the best girl i ever see, and had the most sand.
It was a canoe, and warn't fastened with nothing but a rope.
As i sprung aboard i sung out out with you, jim, and set her loose!
Glory be to goodness, we're shut of them!
Cut loose and let her slide!
And just a laying to their oars and making their skiff hum!
It was the king and the duke.
Tired of our company, hey?
I says no, your majesty, we warn't please don't, your majesty!
Honest, i'll tell you everything just as it happened, your majesty.
And shook me up again, and said he reckoned he'd drownd me.
But the duke says leggo the boy, you old idiot!
Would you a done any different?
Did you inquire around for him when you got loose?
And we reckoned the niggers stole it!
Yes, says the duke, kinder slow and deliberate and sarcastic, we did.
After about a half a minute the king drawls out leastways, i did.
The duke says, the same way on the contrary, i did.
The king kind of ruffles up, and says looky here, bilgewater, what'r you referrin' to?
Don't you reckon i know who hid that money in that coffin?
I know you do know, because you done it yourself!
And the duke went for him.
The king sings out take y'r hands off!
I take it all back!
You old scoundrel, i didn't, and you know i didn't.
Well, then, i b'lieve you.
But you not only had it in mind to do it, but you done it.
I wisht i never die if i done it, duke, and that's honest.
It makes me feel ridiculous to think i was soft enough to believe that rubbage.
I don't want to hear no more out of you!
And now you see what you got by it.
G'long to bed, and don't you deffersit me no more deffersits, long 's you live!
That made me feel easy and satisfied.
Jim and me got uneasy.
We didn't like the look of it.
We judged they was studying up some kind of worse deviltry than ever.
So we stayed where we was.
The duke he fretted and sweated around, and was in a mighty sour way.
Something was a brewing, sure.
But there warn't no answer, and nobody come out of the wigwam.
Then i set down and cried i couldn't help it.
But i couldn't set still long.
Down to silas phelps' place, two mile below here.
He's a runaway nigger, and they've got him.
Was you looking for him?
Been there ever since afeard to come out.
Well, he says, you needn't be afeard no more, becuz they've got him.
He run off f'm down south, som'ers.
It's a good job they got him.
There's two hunderd dollars reward on him.
It's like picking up money out'n the road.
You bet i'd wait, if it was seven year.
That's me, every time, says i.
Maybe there's something ain't straight about it.
But it is , though straight as a string.
I see the handbill myself.
No sirree bob , they ain't no trouble 'bout that speculation, you bet you.
Say, gimme a chaw tobacker, won't ye?
I didn't have none, so he left.
I went to the raft, and set down in the wigwam to think.
But i couldn't come to nothing.
And then think of me !
Thinks as long as he can hide it, it ain't no disgrace.
That was my fix exactly.
But the words wouldn't come.
It warn't no use to try and hide it from him.
Nor from me , neither.
I knowed very well why they wouldn't come.
You can't pray a lie i found that out.
It was a close place.
I took it up, and held it in my hand.
It was awful thoughts and awful words, but they was said.
And i let them stay said and never thought no more about reforming.
So i just took a look, and shoved along, straight for town.
Well, the very first man i see when i got there was the duke.
They had the cheek, them frauds!
I was right on him before i could shirk.
He looked astonished, and says hel lo !
Then he says, kind of glad and eager, where's the raft?
Got her in a good place?
I says why, that's just what i was going to ask your grace.
I slept in the woods all night.
But what did become of the raft, then?
Blamed if i know that is, what's become of the raft.
I wouldn't shake my nigger , would i?
The only nigger i had in the world, and the only property.
We never thought of that.
And i've pegged along ever since, dry as a powder horn.
We'd skin him if he done that!
That old fool sold him, and never divided with me, and the money's gone.
Well, you can't get your nigger, that's all so dry up your blubbering.
Looky here do you think you'd venture to blow on us?
Blamed if i think i'd trust you.
I got to turn out and find my nigger.
At last he says i'll tell you something.
We got to be here three days.
All right, i says, i can walk it in three days.
And i'll start this very afternoon.
That was the order i wanted, and that was the one i played for.
I wanted to be left free to work my plans.
So clear out, he says and you can tell mr. foster whatever you want to.
So i left, and struck for the back country.
I didn't look around, but i kinder felt like he was watching me.
But i knowed i could tire him out at that.
I didn't want no trouble with their kind.
Phelps' was one of these little one horse cotton plantations, and they all look alike.
And such another powwow as they made!
There ain't no harm in a hound, nohow.
I out with a yes'm before i thought.
Dear, dear, it does seem like i could eat you up!
Children, it's your cousin tom!
I said i had got it on the boat.
We been expecting you a couple of days and more.
Yes'm she don't say yes'm say aunt sally.
We blowed out a cylinder head.
Well, it's lucky because sometimes people do get hurt.
And i think he died afterwards.
Your uncle silas knowed a family in baton rouge that knowed his people very well.
Yes, i remember now, he did die.
Mortification set in, and they had to amputate him.
But it didn't save him.
Yes, it was mortification that was it.
He turned blue all over, and died in the hope of a glorious resurrection.
They say he was a sight to look at.
Your uncle's been up to the town every day to fetch you.
And he's gone again, not more'n an hour ago he'll be back any minute now.
You must a met him on the road, didn't you?
Oldish man, with a no, i didn't see nobody, aunt sally.
Who'd you give the baggage to?
Why, child, it 'll be stole!
Not where i hid it i reckon it won't, i says.
How'd you get your breakfast so early on the boat?
I was getting so uneasy i couldn't listen good.
But i couldn't get no show, mrs. phelps kept it up and run on so.
Well, i see i was up a stump and up it good.
So i says to myself, here's another place where i got to resk the truth.
Stick your head down lower there, that'll do you can't be seen now.
Don't you let on you're here.
I'll play a joke on him.
Children, don't you say a word.
I see i was in a fix now.
Mrs. phelps she jumps for him, and says has he come?
She says, what in the warld can have become of him?
She says i'm ready to go distracted!
He must a come and you've missed him along the road.
I know it's so something tells me so.
Why, sally, i couldn't miss him along the road you know that.
But oh, dear, dear, what will sis say!
You must a missed him.
He oh, don't distress me any more'n i'm already distressed.
I don't know what in the world to make of it.
I'm at my wit's end, and i don't mind acknowledging 't i'm right down scared.
But there's no hope that he's come for he couldn't come and me miss him.
Sally, it's terrible just terrible something's happened to the boat, sure!
The old gentleman stared, and says why, who's that?
Who do you reckon 't is?
By jings, i most slumped through the floor!
If i'd a called it a bolthead it would a done just as well.
Then i says to myself, s'pose tom sawyer comes down on that boat?
Well, i couldn't have it that way it wouldn't do at all.
I must go up the road and waylay him.
So, then, what you want to come back and ha'nt me for?
I says i hain't come back i hain't been gone .
He says don't you play nothing on me, because i wouldn't on you.
Honest injun now, you ain't a ghost?
Honest injun, i ain't, i says.
Looky here, warn't you ever murdered at all?
I warn't ever murdered at all i played it on them.
You come in here and feel of me if you don't believe me.
He said, let him alone a minute, and don't disturb him.
I says all right but wait a minute.
There's one more thing a thing that nobody don't know but me.
Why, jim is he stopped and went to studying.
I says i know what you'll say.
You'll say it's dirty, low down business but what if it is?
His eye lit up, and he says i'll help you steal him!
Well, i let go all holts then, like i was shot.
Only i couldn't believe it.
Tom sawyer a nigger stealer!
The old gentleman was at the door, and he says why, this is wonderful!
Whoever would a thought it was in that mare to do it?
I wish we'd a timed her.
And she hain't sweated a hair not a hair.
He was the innocentest, best old soul i ever see.
There was plenty other farmer preachers like that, and done the same way, down south.
Why, i do believe it's a stranger.
Jimmy run and tell lize to put on another plate for dinner.
Oh, i can't make you so much trouble i couldn't think of it.
I'll walk i don't mind the distance.
But we won't let you walk it wouldn't be southern hospitality to do it.
It's a long, dusty three mile, and we can't let you walk.
Come right in and make yourself at home.
He looked kind of hurt, and says i'm surprised at you, m'am.
You're s'rp why, what do you reckon i am?
I've a good notion to take and say, what do you mean by kissing me?
He looked kind of humble, and says i didn't mean nothing, m'am.
I didn't mean no harm.
I i thought you'd like it.
What made you think i'd like it?
Only, they they told me you would.
They told you i would.
Whoever told you's another lunatic.
I never heard the beat of it.
They all said so, m'am.
Out with their names, or ther'll be an idiot short.
They all told me to.
They all said, kiss her and said she'd like it.
They all said it every one of them.
But i'm sorry, m'am, and i won't do it no more i won't, honest.
Well, i sh'd reckon you won't!
No'm, i'm honest about it i won't ever do it again till you ask me.
Well, i never see the beat of it in my born days!
Well, he says, it does surprise me so.
I can't make it out, somehow.
They said you would, and i thought you would.
Why, no i i well, no, i b'lieve i didn't.
We warn't looking for you at all, but only tom.
Sis never wrote to me about anybody coming but him.
But it was a mistake, aunt sally.
This ain't no healthy place for a stranger to come.
No not impudent whelps, sid.
Well, to think of that performance!
But i couldn't help it.
It was a dreadful thing to see.
Human beings can be awful cruel to one another.
We see we was too late couldn't do no good.
Tom sawyer he says the same.
We stopped talking, and got to thinking.
I bet i know where jim is.
In that hut down by the ash hopper.
What did you think the vittles was for?
Well, it wasn't for a dog.
Because part of it was watermelon.
So it was i noticed it.
Well, it does beat all that i never thought about a dog not eating watermelon.
It shows how a body can see and don't see at the same time.
What a head for just a boy to have!
Pretty soon tom says ready?
All right bring it out.
My plan is this, i says.
We can easy find out if it's jim in there.
Why, cert'nly it would work, like rats a fighting.
But it's too blame' simple there ain't nothing to it.
What's the good of a plan that ain't no more trouble than that?
It's as mild as goose milk.
Why, huck, it wouldn't make no more talk than breaking into a soap factory.
So i was satisfied, and said we would waltz in on it.
And that is what he done.
That was the thing that was too many for me.
I couldn't understand it no way at all.
Don't i generly know what i'm about?
Didn't i say i was going to help steal the nigger?
That's all he said, and that's all i said.
If he was bound to have it so, i couldn't help it.
We went through the yard so as to see what the hounds would do.
I says here's the ticket.
This hole's big enough for jim to get through if we wrench off the board.
That's more like , he says.
There ain't no hurry le's keep on looking around.
It was as long as the hut, but narrow only about six foot wide.
The door to it was at the south end, and was padlocked.
He says now we're all right.
It 'll take about a week!
That was to keep witches off.
So tom says what's the vittles for?
Going to feed the dogs?
Does you want to go en look at 'im?
I hunched tom, and whispers you going, right here in the daybreak?
No, it warn't but it's the plan now .
So, drat him, we went along, but i didn't like it much.
I just knowed how it would be i just expected it.
Do he know you genlmen?
We could see pretty well now.
Why, dis yer runaway nigger.
I don't reckon he does but what put that into your head?
Didn' he jis' dis minute sing out like he knowed you?
Tom says, in a puzzled up kind of way well, that's mighty curious.
When did he sing out?
What did he sing out?
And turns to me, perfectly ca'm, and says, did you hear anybody sing out?
No, sah, says jim i hain't said nothing, sah.
No, sah, i hain't said a word.
Did you ever see us before?
No, sah not as i knows on.
What made you think somebody sung out?
Oh, it's de dad blame' witches, sah, en i wisht i was dead, i do.
Dey's awluz at it, sah, en dey do mos' kill me, dey sk'yers me so.
I jis' wish to goodness he was heah now den what would he say!
I jis' bet he couldn' fine no way to git aroun' it dis time.
And so it makes it so rotten difficult to get up a difficult plan.
There ain't no watchman to be drugged now there ought to be a watchman.
There ain't even a dog to give a sleeping mixture to.
Why, drat it, huck, it's the stupidest arrangement i ever see.
You got to invent all the difficulties.
Now look at just that one thing of the lantern.
Why, we could work with a torchlight procession if we wanted to, i believe.
What do we want of a saw?
What do we want of it?
Well, if that ain't just like you, huck finn.
You can get up the infant schooliest ways of going at a thing.
Why, hain't you ever read any books at all?
Baron trenck, nor casanova, nor benvenuto chelleeny, nor henri iv., nor none of them heroes?
I wish there was a moat to this cabin.
If we get time, the night of the escape, we'll dig one.
But he never heard me.
He had forgot me and everything else.
He had his chin in his hand, thinking.
Why, to saw jim's leg off, he says.
I says why, there ain't no necessity for it.
And what would you want to saw his leg off for, anyway?
Well, some of the best authorities has done it.
They couldn't get the chain off, so they just cut their hand off and shoved.
And a leg would be better still.
But we got to let that go.
And we can send it to him in a pie it's mostly done that way.
And i've et worse pies.
He has got use for it.
How you talk, you better say you don't know nothing about it.
He's got to have a rope ladder they all do.
What in the nation can he do with it?
He can hide it in his bed, can't he?
That's what they all do and he's got to, too.
S'pose he don't do nothing with it?
Ain't it there in his bed, for a clew, after he's gone?
And don't you reckon they'll want clews?
And you wouldn't leave them any?
That would be a pretty howdy do, wouldn't it!
Who ever heard of a state prisoner escaping by a hickry bark ladder?
He said that would do.
And that gave him another idea, and he says borrow a shirt, too.
What do we want of a shirt, tom?
Want it for jim to keep a journal on.
Journal your granny jim can't write.
They wouldn't use a goose quill if they had it.
Well, then, what'll we make him the ink out of?
The iron mask always done that, and it's a blame' good way, too.
Jim ain't got no tin plates.
They feed him in a pan.
That ain't nothing we can get him some.
Can't nobody read his plates.
That ain't got anything to do with it, huck finn.
All he's got to do is to write on the plate and throw it out.
You don't have to be able to read it.
Well, then, what's the sense in wasting the plates?
Why, blame it all, it ain't the prisoner's plates.
But it's somebody's plates, ain't it?
So we cleared out for the house.
So we allowed we would steal everything there was that come handy.
Tom said that what he meant was, we could steal anything we needed .
Well, i says, i needed the watermelon.
He says everything's all right now except tools and that's easy fixed.
We ain't a going to gnaw him out, are we?
Why, they might as well lend him the key and done with it.
Picks and shovels why, they wouldn't furnish 'em to a king.
A couple of case knives.
To dig the foundations out from under that cabin with?
Confound it, it's foolish, tom.
And it takes them weeks and weeks and weeks, and for ever and ever.
A month and a half.
Thirty seven year and he come out in china.
I wish the bottom of this fortress was solid rock.
Jim don't know nobody in china.
What's that got to do with it?
Neither did that other fellow.
But you're always a wandering off on a side issue.
Why can't you stick to the main point?
Yes he will last , too.
How long will it take, tom?
He'll hear jim ain't from there.
Then his next move will be to advertise jim, or something like that.
So we can't resk being as long digging him out as we ought to.
By rights i reckon we ought to be a couple of years but we can't.
Yes, i reckon that 'll be the best way.
Now, there's sense in that, i says.
It wouldn't strain me none, after i got my hand in.
So i'll mosey along now, and smouch a couple of case knives.
Smouch three, he says we want one to make a saw out of.
Run along and smouch the knives three of them.
Then he says it ain't no use, huck, it ain't a going to work.
Well, then, what we going to do, tom?
I says your head gets leveler and leveler all the time, tom sawyer, i says.
He had his own by him, but i handed him mine.
He flung it down, and says gimme a case knife .
I didn't know just what to do but then i thought.
He was always just that particular.
At last he says it ain't no use, it can't be done.
What you reckon i better do?
Can't you think of no way?
Yes, i says, but i reckon it ain't regular.
Come up the stairs, and let on it's a lightning rod.
Take them in through the hole, i says, when we get it done.
Said we'd got to post jim first.
We'll send you some things by them.
It was his way when he'd got his plans set.
Tom was in high spirits.
And he said it would make us all celebrated that had a hand in it.
By jings, we forgot to fasten that lean to door!
Mars sid, i felt um i felt um, sah dey was all over me.
But mos'ly i wisht dey'd lemme 'lone, i does.
Tom says well, i tell you what i think.
What makes them come here just at this runaway nigger's breakfast time?
It's because they're hungry that's the reason.
You make them a witch pie that's the thing for you to do.
But my lan', mars sid, how's i gwyne to make 'm a witch pie?
I doan' know how to make it.
I hain't ever hearn er sich a thing b'fo'.
Well, then, i'll have to make it myself.
Will you do it, honey?
I'll wusshup de groun' und' yo' foot, i will!
But you got to be mighty careful.
And above all, don't you handle the witch things.
Hannel 'm , mars sid?
What is you a talkin' 'bout?
Uncle silas he says it's most uncommon curious, i can't understand it.
Just listen at the man!
And it 'll be the third i've made in two years.
I know it, sally, and i do try all i can.
And the shirt ain't all that's gone, nuther.
Ther's a spoon gone and that ain't all.
There was ten, and now ther's only nine.
Why, what else is gone, sally?
Ther's six candles gone that's what.
Oh, i wouldn't hurry next year 'll do.
Well, for the land's sake!
I'll stop up them holes to day, says uncle silas, looking sorrowful.
S'pose the rats took the sheet ?
Clah to goodness i hain't no notion, miss' sally.
I reckon the world is coming to an end.
I never see the beat of it in all my born days.
Cler out from here, you hussy, er i'll take a skillet to ye!
Well, she was just a biling.
But not long, because she says it's just as i expected.
Give a body a rest!
Then he stood about five minutes, picking tallow drip off of his candle and thinking.
I could show her now that i warn't to blame on account of the rats.
But never mind let it go.
I reckon it wouldn't do no good.
And so he went on a mumbling up stairs, and then we left.
He was a mighty nice old man.
She says go 'long to your play, and don't bother me.
I know better, i counted 'm myself.
Well, i've counted them twice, aunty, and i can't make but nine.
She looked out of all patience, but of course she come to count anybody would.
I declare to gracious ther' ain't but nine!
Why, what in the world plague take the things, i'll count 'm again.
And she looked huffy and bothered both.
But tom says why, aunty, i don't think there's ten.
You numskull, didn't you see me count 'm?
I know, but well, i'll count 'm again .
So i smouched one, and they come out nine, same as the other time.
But that pie was a job we had no end of trouble with that pie.
We let on it took nine months to make it.
We could a had a whole dinner.
But we didn't need it.
That's the one which the prisoner has to scrabble on the wall.
Look at lady jane grey, he says look at gilford dudley look at old northumberland!
Why, huck, s'pose it is considerble trouble?
What you going to do?
How you going to get around it?
Jim's got to do his inscription and coat of arms.
Oh, you don't understand, jim a coat of arms is very different.
Got it out of a book means the more haste the less speed.
Geewhillikins, i says, but what does the rest of it mean?
Well, anyway, i says, what's some of it?
A fess a fess is you don't need to know what a fess is.
I'll show him how to make it when he gets to it.
Shucks, tom, i says, i think you might tell a person.
But he's got to have it.
That was just his way.
If it didn't suit him to explain a thing to you, he wouldn't do it.
You might pump at him a week, it wouldn't make no difference.
Here a captive heart busted.
Here a poor prisoner, forsook by the world and friends, fretted his sorrowful life.
Tom's voice trembled whilst he was reading them, and he most broke down.
But tom said he would let me help him do it.
Tom said she was going to get one of us, sure, before we got through.
We see it warn't no use we got to go and fetch jim.
He could out superintend any boy i ever see.
He knowed how to do everything.
But tom thought of something, and says you got any spiders in here, jim?
No, sah, thanks to goodness i hain't, mars tom.
All right, we'll get you some.
But bless you, honey, i doan' want none.
I jis' 's soon have rattlesnakes aroun'.
Tom thought a minute or two, and says it's a good idea.
And i reckon it's been done.
It must a been done it stands to reason.
Yes, it's a prime good idea.
Where could you keep it?
De goodness gracious alive, mars tom!
Why, jim, you wouldn't be afraid of it after a little.
Any book will tell you that.
You try that's all i ask just try for two or three days.
Please , mars tom doan ' talk so!
I can't stan ' it!
He'd let me shove his head in my mouf fer a favor, hain't it?
I lay he'd wait a pow'ful long time 'fo' i ast him.
En mo' en dat, i doan' want him to sleep wid me.
Jim, don't act so foolish.
Why, mars tom, i doan' want no sich glory.
Snake take 'n bite jim's chin off, den whah is de glory?
No, sah, i doan' want no sich doin's.
Blame it, can't you try ?
I only want you to try you needn't keep it up if it don't work.
But de trouble all done ef de snake bite me while i's a tryin' him.
Well, then, let it go, let it go, if you're so bull headed about it.
I never knowed b'fo' 't was so much bother and trouble to be a prisoner.
Well, it always is when it's done right.
You got any rats around here?
No, sah, i hain't seed none.
Well, we'll get you some rats.
Why, mars tom, i doan' want no rats.
But, jim, you got to have 'em they all do.
So don't make no more fuss about it.
Prisoners ain't ever without rats.
There ain't no instance of it.
But you got to play music to them.
You got anything to play music on?
Yes they would they don't care what kind of music 'tis.
A jews harp's plenty good enough for a rat.
All animals like music in a prison they dote on it.
Specially, painful music and you can't get no other kind out of a jews harp.
It always interests them they come out to see what's the matter with you.
Yes, you're all right you're fixed very well.
And they'll just fairly swarm over you, and have a noble good time.
Yes, dey will, i reck'n, mars tom, but what kine er time is jim havin'?
Blest if i kin see de pint.
But i'll do it ef i got to.
Could you raise a flower here, do you reckon?
Well, you try it, anyway.
Some other prisoners has done it.
And you want to water it with your tears.
Why, i got plenty spring water, mars tom.
You don't want spring water you want to water it with your tears.
It's the way they always do.
You got to do it with tears.
I never see a likelier lot of rats than what that first haul was.
The family was at home.
But it didn't matter much, because they was still on the premises somewheres.
So we judged we could get some of them again.
No, there warn't no real scarcity of snakes about the house for a considerable spell.
I never see such a woman.
And you could hear her whoop to jericho.
You couldn't get her to take a holt of one of them with the tongs.
But tom said all women was just so.
He said they was made that way for some reason or other.
Well, by the end of three weeks everything was in pretty good shape.
We reckoned we was all going to die, but didn't.
It was the most undigestible sawdust i ever see and tom said the same.
So tom said, now for the nonnamous letters.
Warnings to the people that something is up.
Sometimes it's done one way, sometimes another.
But there's always somebody spying around that gives notice to the governor of the castle.
Was going to light out of the tooleries, a servant girl done it.
It's a very good way, and so is the nonnamous letters.
But looky here, tom, what do we want to warn anybody for that something's up?
Let them find it out for themselves it's their lookout.
Yes, i know but you can't depend on them.
It's the way they've acted from the very start left us to do everything .
They're so confiding and mullet headed they don't take notice of nothing at all.
Well, as for me, tom, that's the way i'd like.
He says, and looked disgusted.
So i says but i ain't going to make no complaint.
Any way that suits you suits me.
What you going to do about the servant girl?
You slide in, in the middle of the night, and hook that yaller girl's frock.
You wouldn't look like a servant girl then , would you?
No, but there won't be nobody to see what i look like, anyway .
That ain't got nothing to do with it.
Hain't you got no principle at all?
All right, i ain't saying nothing i'm the servant girl.
I'll hook a gown from aunt sally.
Well, then, you'll have to stay in the cabin when me and jim leaves.
When a prisoner of style escapes it's called an evasion.
It's always called so when a king escapes, f'rinstance.
I never see a family in such a sweat.
If a door banged, aunt sally she jumped and said ouch!
If anything fell, she jumped and said ouch!
He said it showed it was done right.
So he said, now for the grand bulge!
This letter said don't betray me, i wish to be your friend.
I do not wish any reward but to know i have done the right thing.
Well, you left it laid out, then it ain't here.
We can get along without it, i says.
And then mosey right down the lightning rod and come along.
So out he went, and down cellar went i.
What you been doing down there?
Well, then, what possessed you to go down there this time of night?
Don't answer me that way.
Tom, i want to know what you been doing down there.
So she went away as i opened the door and walked into the setting room.
My, but there was a crowd there!
Fifteen farmers, and every one of them had a gun.
I was most powerful sick, and slunk to a chair and set down.
I warn't easy myself, but i didn't take my hat off, all the same.
He's got the brain fever as shore as you're born, and they're oozing out!
Now cler out to bed, and don't lemme see no more of you till morning!
His eyes just blazed and he says no!
If we could put it off till hurry!
Right at your elbow if you reach out your arm you can touch him.
He's dressed, and everything's ready.
Now we'll slide out and give the sheep signal.
Now we was in the lean to, and heard trampings close by outside.
But we didn't answer we just unfurled our heels and shoved.
Then there was a rush, and a bang, bang, bang!
And the bullets fairly whizzed around us!
We heard them sing out here they are!
They've broke for the river!
After 'em, boys, and turn loose the dogs!
So here they come, full tilt.
En a mighty good job it wuz, too, huck.
Boys, we done it elegant!
Man the sweeps man the sweeps!
But me and jim was consulting and thinking.
And after we'd thought a minute, i says say it, jim.
So he says well, den, dis is de way it look to me, huck.
Is dat like mars tom sawyer?
Well , den, is jim gywne to say it?
Then he give us a piece of his mind, but it didn't do no good.
It's the way they all do.
And after a minute, he says how'd you say he got shot?
He had a dream, i says, and it shot him.
So he lit up his lantern, and got his saddle bags, and we started.
Why, me and sid, and and and the guns that's what i mean.
I struck an idea pretty soon.
Spos'n it takes him three or four days?
What are we going to do?
Lay around there till he lets the cat out of the bag?
No, sir i know what i'll do.
Where you been all this time, you rascal?
Why, where ever did you go?
Your aunt's been mighty uneasy.
She needn't, i says, because we was all right.
Old mrs. hotchkiss was the worst her tongue was a going all the time.
I says to sister damrell didn't i, sister damrell?
S'i, he's crazy, s'i them's the very words i said.
You all hearn me he's crazy, s'i everything shows it, s'i.
N' who dug that air hole ?
N' who my very words , brer penrod!
I was a sayin' pass that air sasser o' m'lasses, won't ye?
Without help , mind you 'thout help !
Forty couldn't a done every thing that's been done.
It's jist as i was a sayin' to brer phelps, his own self.
S'e, what do you think of it, sister hotchkiss, s'e?
Think o' what, brer phelps, s'i?
Think o' that bed leg sawed off that a way, s'e?
Must a ben a raft uv 'm at it right along, all the time, amost.
They stole that shirt right off o' the line!
I tell you, it just bangs anything i ever heard of.
Why, sperits couldn't a done better and been no smarter.
You explain that to me if you can!
I hope to gracious if i warn't afraid they'd steal some o' the family!
I was just to that pass i didn't have no reasoning faculties no more.
But i dasn't go fur, or she'd a sent for me.
What has become of that boy?
No you won't, she says.
You'll stay right wher' you are one's enough to be lost at a time.
If he ain't here to supper, your uncle 'll go.
Well, he warn't there to supper so right after supper uncle went.
He come back about ten a little bit uneasy hadn't run across tom's track.
So she had to be satisfied.
And by and by the old man says did i give you the letter?
The one i got yesterday out of the post office.
No, you didn't give me no letter.
Well, i must a forgot it.
She says why, it's from st. petersburg it's from sis.
I allowed another walk would do me good but i couldn't stir.
I hid the letter behind the first thing that come handy, and rushed.
Of course i judged he must be a runaway nigger, and there i was !
It was a fix, i tell you!
He ain't no bad nigger, gentlemen that's what i think about him.
Somebody says well, it sounds very good, doctor, i'm obleeged to say.
Then they come out and locked him up.
But i had plenty time.
So i set down and laid for him to wake.
Why, i'm at home !
It's all right, i says.
The same, i says, but couldn't say it pretty brash.
But he never noticed, but says good!
Now we're all right and safe!
I was going to say yes but she chipped in and says about what, sid?
Why, about the way the whole thing was done.
There ain't but one how we set the runaway nigger free me and tom.
Set the run what is the child talking about!
Dear, dear, out of his head again!
No , i ain't out of my head i know all what i'm talking about.
We did set him free me and tom.
We laid out to do it, and we done it.
And we done it elegant, too.
Well, i never heard the likes of it in all my born days!
Tom says, dropping his smile and looking surprised.
Why, the runaway nigger, of course.
Says aunt sally the runaway nigger?
And don't you lose a minute.
He ain't no slave he's as free as any cretur that walks this earth!
What does the child mean?
I've knowed him all his life, and so has tom, there.
Well, that is a question, i must say and just like women!
Says aunt sally is he changed so?
Why, that ain't tom , it's sid tom's tom's why, where is tom?
He was here a minute ago.
You mean where's huck finn that's what you mean!
That would be a pretty howdy do.
Come out from under that bed, huck finn.
Why, i never heard nothing from you, says aunt sally.
Well, i never got 'em, sis.
Aunt polly she turns around slow and severe, and says you, tom!
He says, kind of pettish.
Don't you what me , you impudent thing hand out them letters.
I hain't looked into them, i hain't touched them.
So i never said nothing.
But i reckoned it was about as well the way it was.
What i tell you up dah on jackson islan'?
Hadn't when i come away, anyhow.
Jim says, kind of solemn he ain't a comin' back no mo', huck.
Nemmine why, huck but he ain't comin' back no mo.
Well, den, you kin git yo' money when you wants it, kase dat wuz him.
Yours truly, huck finn .
My thanks are due in three quarters.
Self righteousness is not religion.
To attack the first is not to assail the last.
Is the satirist of vanity fair admired in high places?
Why have i alluded to this man?
They say he is like fielding they talk of his wit, humour, comic powers.
Chapter i there was no possibility of taking a walk that day.
What does bessie say i have done?
Be seated somewhere and until you can speak pleasantly, remain silent.
A breakfast room adjoined the drawing room, i slipped in there.
The two ships becalmed on a torpid sea, i believed to be marine phantoms.
With bewick on my knee, i was then happy happy at least in my way.
I feared nothing but interruption, and that came too soon.
The breakfast room door opened.
Cried the voice of john reed then he paused he found the room apparently empty.
Where the dickens is she!
Joan is not here tell mama she is run out into the rain bad animal!
I asked, with awkward diffidence.
Say, 'what do you want, master reed?
John had not much affection for his mother and sisters, and an antipathy to me.
What were you doing behind the curtain?
I returned to the window and fetched it thence.
Did she say that to me?
Did you hear her, eliza and georgiana?
I really saw in him a tyrant, a murderer.
We were parted i heard the words dear!
What a fury to fly at master john!
Four hands were immediately laid upon me, and i was borne upstairs.
Hold her arms, miss abbot she's like a mad cat.
What shocking conduct, miss eyre, to strike a young gentleman, your benefactress's son!
How is he my master?
No you are less than a servant, for you do nothing for your keep.
There, sit down, and think over your wickedness.
If you don't sit still, you must be tied down, said bessie.
Miss abbot, lend me your garters she would break mine directly.
Miss abbot turned to divest a stout leg of the necessary ligature.
Don't take them off, i cried i will not stir.
In guarantee whereof, i attached myself to my seat by my hands.
She never did so before, at last said bessie, turning to the abigail.
But it was always in her, was the reply.
I've told missis often my opinion about the child, and missis agreed with me.
Come, bessie, we will leave her i wouldn't have her heart for anything.
Yes no jail was ever more secure.
I returned to my stool.
Why was i always suffering, always browbeaten, always accused, for ever condemned?
Why could i never please?
Why was it useless to try to win any one's favour?
Eliza, who was headstrong and selfish, was respected.
What a consternation of soul was mine that dreary afternoon!
How all my brain was in tumult, and all my heart in insurrection!
Yet in what darkness, what dense ignorance, was the mental battle fought!
If they did not love me, in fact, as little did i love them.
That certainly was a crime and was i fit to die?
Or was the vault under the chancel of gateshead church an inviting bourne?
A singular notion dawned upon me.
Steps came running along the outer passage the key turned, bessie and abbot entered.
Miss eyre, are you ill?
It went quite through me!
Let me go into the nursery!
I saw a light, and i thought a ghost would come.
She has screamed out on purpose, declared abbot, in some disgust.
Miss jane screamed so loud, ma'am, pleaded bessie.
Let her go, was the only answer.
Loose bessie's hand, child you cannot succeed in getting out by these means, be assured.
I cannot endure it let me be punished some other way!
I shall be killed if silence!
This violence is all most repulsive and so, no doubt, she felt it.
I rested my head against a pillow or an arm, and felt easy.
Do you feel as if you should sleep, miss?
Scarcely dared i answer her for i feared the next sentence might be rough.
Would you like to drink, or could you eat anything?
It emboldened me to ask a question.
Bessie, what is the matter with me?
Bessie went into the housemaid's apartment, which was near.
Missis was rather too hard.
At last both slept the fire and the candle went out.
Coming, like most other favours long deferred and often wished for, too late!
This book i had again and again perused with delight.
She passed into another ballad, this time a really doleful one.
Come, miss jane, don't cry, said bessie as she finished.
She might as well have said to the fire, don't burn!
But how could she divine the morbid suffering to which i was a prey?
In the course of the morning mr. lloyd came again.
Said he, as he entered the nursery.
Well, nurse, how is she?
Bessie answered that i was doing very well.
Come here, miss jane your name is jane, is it not?
Well, you have been crying, miss jane eyre can you tell me what about?
Why, she is too old for such pettishness.
I cry because i am miserable.
The good apothecary appeared a little puzzled.
Having considered me at leisure, he said what made you ill yesterday?
She had a fall, said bessie, again putting in her word.
Why, that is like a baby again!
Can't she manage to walk at her age?
She must be eight or nine years old.
The fall did not make you ill what did, then?
Pursued mr. lloyd when bessie was gone.
I was shut up in a room where there is a ghost till after dark.
I saw mr. lloyd smile and frown at the same time.
What, you are a baby after all!
You are afraid of ghosts?
And is it that makes you so miserable?
Are you afraid now in daylight?
Can you tell me some of them?
How much i wished to reply fully to this question!
How difficult it was to frame any answer!
For one thing, i have no father or mother, brothers or sisters.
You have a kind aunt and cousins.
Mr. lloyd a second time produced his snuff box.
Don't you think gateshead hall a very beautiful house?
Are you not very thankful to have such a fine place to live at?
You can't be silly enough to wish to leave such a splendid place?
Perhaps you may who knows?
Have you any relations besides mrs. reed?
None belonging to your father?
If you had such, would you like to go to them?
No i should not like to belong to poor people, was my reply.
Not even if they were kind to you?
But are your relatives so very poor?
Would you like to go to school?
I should indeed like to go to school, was the audible conclusion of my musings.
Who knows what may happen?
Said mr. lloyd, as he got up.
Is that your mistress, nurse?
I should like to speak to her before i go.
Bessie invited him to walk into the breakfast room, and led the way out.
Abbot, i think, gave me credit for being a sort of infantine guy fawkes.
Yes, i doat on miss georgiana!
Bessie, i could fancy a welsh rabbit for supper.
So could i with a roast onion.
What would uncle reed say to you, if he were alive?
Was my scarcely voluntary demand.
I was now in for it.
I half believed her for i felt indeed only bad feelings surging in my breast.
November, december, and half of january passed away.
She was pretty too, if my recollections of her face and person are correct.
Miss jane, take off your pinafore what are you doing there?
Have you washed your hands and face this morning?
And what are you doing now?
What should i see besides aunt reed in the apartment?
A man or a woman?
Was the doubtful answer and he prolonged his scrutiny for some minutes.
Presently he addressed me your name, little girl?
Well, jane eyre, and are you a good child?
Sorry indeed to hear it!
I stepped across the rug he placed me square and straight before him.
What a face he had, now that it was almost on a level with mine!
And what large prominent teeth!
Do you know where the wicked go after death?
They go to hell, was my ready and orthodox answer.
Can you tell me that?
A pit full of fire.
What must you do to avoid it?
How can you keep in good health?
Children younger than you die daily.
Do you say your prayers night and morning?
Do you read your bible?
Are you fond of it?
I hope you like them?
The verse of a psalm!
Psalms are not interesting, i remarked.
I will speak to miss temple and the teachers.
Your decisions are perfectly judicious, madam, returned mr. brocklehurst.
Consistency, my dear mr. brocklehurst i advocate consistency in all things.
No doubt, no doubt, madam and now i wish you good morning.
Go out of the room return to the nursery, was her mandate.
Speak i must i had been trodden on severely, and must turn but how?
What strength had i to dart retaliation at my antagonist?
What more have you to say?
That eye of hers, that voice stirred every antipathy i had.
How dare you affirm that, jane eyre?
How dare i, mrs. reed?
Because it is the truth .
I will tell anybody who asks me questions, this exact tale.
People think you a good woman, but you are bad, hard hearted.
Jane, you are under a mistake what is the matter with you?
Why do you tremble so violently?
Would you like to drink some water?
Is there anything else you wish for, jane?
I assure you, i desire to be your friend.
Jane, you don't understand these things children must be corrected for their faults.
Deceit is not my fault!
I cried out in a savage, high voice.
I was left there alone winner of the field.
I took a book some arabian tales i sat down and endeavoured to read.
All at once i heard a clear voice call, miss jane!
Why don't you come when you are called?
I just put my two arms round her and said, come, bessie!
And won't you be sorry to leave poor bessie?
What does bessie care for me?
She is always scolding me.
Because you're such a queer, frightened, shy little thing.
But you are rather put upon, that's certain.
Now, come in, and i've some good news for you.
I don't think you have, bessie.
What sorrowful eyes you fix on me!
Bessie, you must promise not to scold me any more till i go.
Don't start when i chance to speak rather sharply it's so provoking.
If you dread them they'll dislike you.
You've got quite a new way of talking.
What makes you so venturesome and hardy?
And so you're glad to leave me?
Not at all, bessie indeed, just now i'm rather sorry.
How coolly my little lady says it!
I'll kiss you and welcome bend your head down.
Bessie stooped we mutually embraced, and i followed her into the house quite comforted.
Even for me life had its gleams of sunshine.
What did you say, miss?
Nothing i covered my face with the bedclothes, and turned from her to the wall.
That was wrong, miss jane.
It was quite right, bessie.
Your missis has not been my friend she has been my foe.
Cried i, as we passed through the hall and went out at the front door.
Is she going by herself?
And how far is it?
I wonder mrs. reed is not afraid to trust her so far alone.
Is there a little girl called jane eyre here?
She asked, placing her hand on my shoulder.
I explained to her that i had no parents.
Miss miller again gave the word of command monitors, fetch the supper trays!
A great tumult succeeded for some minutes, during which miss miller repeatedly exclaimed, silence!
By the time that exercise was terminated, day had fully dawned.
I was now nearly sick from inanition, having taken so little the day before.
The porridge is burnt again!
Breakfast was over, and none had breakfasted.
The whole conversation ran on the breakfast, which one and all abused roundly.
It was the sole consolation they had.
The upper teachers now punctually resumed their posts but still, all seemed to wait.
I had heard no order given i was puzzled.
While the direction was being executed, the lady consulted moved slowly up the room.
The duration of each lesson was measured by the clock, which at last struck twelve.
The superintendent rose i have a word to address to the pupils, said she.
The order was now given to the garden!
This portion was rebuilt a.d. , by naomi brocklehurst, of brocklehurst hall, in this county.
You may look at it, replied the girl, offering me the book.
This house where you are come to live.
And why do they call it institution?
Is it in any way different from other schools?
I suppose you are an orphan are not either your father or your mother dead?
Both died before i can remember.
Do we pay no money?
Do they keep us for nothing?
We pay, or our friends pay, fifteen pounds a year for each.
Then why do they call us charity children?
Different benevolent minded ladies and gentlemen in this neighbourhood and in london.
Because he is treasurer and manager of the establishment.
I wish it did she has to answer to mr. brocklehurst for all she does.
Mr. brocklehurst buys all our food and all our clothes.
No two miles off, at a large hall.
Is he a good man?
He is a clergyman, and is said to do a great deal of good.
Did you say that tall lady was called miss temple?
And what are the other teachers called?
Do you like the little black one, and the madame ?
But miss temple is the best isn't she?
Have you been long here?
You ask rather too many questions.
I have given you answers enough for the present now i want to read.
But at that moment the summons sounded for dinner all re entered the house.
Of this preparation a tolerably abundant plateful was apportioned to each pupil.
How can she bear it so quietly so firmly?
I have heard of day dreams is she in a day dream now?
I wonder what sort of a girl she is whether good or naughty.
Such was my first day at lowood.
How small my portion seemed!
I wished it had been doubled.
Burns, you poke your chin most unpleasantly draw it in.
You have never cleaned your nails this morning!
Burns made no answer i wondered at her silence.
Exclaimed miss scatcherd nothing can correct you of your slatternly habits carry the rod away.
I asked, coming behind her.
Yes, she said, and i have just finished it.
And in five minutes more she shut it up.
I was glad of this.
Now, thought i, i can perhaps get her to talk.
I sat down by her on the floor.
What is your name besides burns?
Do you come a long way from here?
I come from a place farther north, quite on the borders of scotland.
Will you ever go back?
I hope so but nobody can be sure of the future.
You must wish to leave lowood?
But that teacher, miss scatcherd, is so cruel to you?
She is severe she dislikes my faults.
And if i were in your place i should dislike her i should resist her.
Still i felt that helen burns considered things by a light invisible to my eyes.
You say you have faults, helen what are they?
To me you seem very good.
This is all very provoking to miss scatcherd, who is naturally neat, punctual, and particular.
Is miss temple as severe to you as miss scatcherd?
At the utterance of miss temple's name, a soft smile flitted over her grave face.
That is curious, said i, it is so easy to be careful.
For you i have no doubt it is.
Yet how well you replied this afternoon.
It was mere chance the subject on which we had been reading had interested me.
Still, i like charles i respect him i pity him, poor murdered king!
Yes, his enemies were the worst they shed blood they had no right to shed.
How dared they kill him!
I recalled her to my level.
And when miss temple teaches you, do your thoughts wander then?
Well, then, with miss temple you are good?
Yes, in a passive way i make no effort i follow as inclination guides me.
There is no merit in such goodness.
A great deal you are good to those who are good to you.
It is all i ever desire to be.
Heathens and savage tribes hold that doctrine, but christians and civilised nations disown it.
It is not violence that best overcomes hate nor vengeance that most certainly heals injury.
Bitter and truculent when excited, i spoke as i felt, without reserve or softening.
Well, i asked impatiently, is not mrs. reed a hard hearted, bad woman?
What a singularly deep impression her injustice seems to have made on your heart!
No ill usage so brands its record on my feelings.
Life appears to me too short to be spent in nursing animosity or registering wrongs.
Surely it will never, on the contrary, be suffered to degenerate from man to fiend?
Helen's head, always drooping, sank a little lower as she finished this sentence.
Sundays were dreary days in that wintry season.
We had to walk two miles to brocklebridge church, where our patron officiated.
I now glanced sideways at this piece of architecture.
I wish the woollen stockings were better looked to!
Your directions shall be attended to, sir, said miss temple.
I think i can explain that circumstance, sir.
I looked over the regulations, and i find no such meal as lunch mentioned.
Madam, allow me an instant.
Mr. brocklehurst again paused perhaps overcome by his feelings.
Red hair, ma'am, curled curled all over?
It is julia severn, replied miss temple, very quietly.
And why has she, or any other, curled hair?
Julia's hair curls naturally, returned miss temple, still more quietly.
Tell all the first form to rise up and direct their faces to the wall.
He scrutinised the reverse of these living medals some five minutes, then pronounced sentence.
Miss temple seemed to remonstrate.
Said mr. brocklehurst, and immediately after it is the new pupil, i perceive.
Then aloud how loud it seemed to me!
Let the child who broke her slate come forward!
I was no helen burns.
Place the child upon it.
Yet such, i grieve to say, is the case.
What a strange light inspired them!
What an extraordinary sensation that ray sent through me!
How the new feeling bore me up!
Such is the imperfect nature of man!
Never, i thought and ardently i wished to die.
But what have i to do with millions?
The eighty, i know, despise me.
How can they pity me after what mr. brocklehurst has said?
We had not sat long thus, when another person came in.
She asked, looking down at my face.
Have you cried your grief away?
I am afraid i never shall do that.
We shall think you what you prove yourself to be, my child.
You will, said she, passing her arm round me.
And now tell me who is the lady whom mr. brocklehurst called your benefactress?
Mrs. reed, my uncle's wife.
My uncle is dead, and he left me to her care.
You have been charged with falsehood defend yourself to me as well as you can.
Say whatever your memory suggests is true but add nothing and exaggerate nothing.
How are you to night, helen?
Have you coughed much to day?
Not quite so much, i think, ma'am.
And the pain in your chest?
It is a little better.
And a tray was soon brought.
How fragrant was the steam of the beverage, and the scent of the toast!
Barbara, said she, can you not bring a little more bread and butter?
There is not enough for three.
Returned miss temple we must make it do, barbara, i suppose.
What stores of knowledge they possessed!
She had scarcely finished ere the bell announced bedtime!
She wore it till evening, patient, unresentful, regarding it as a deserved punishment.
Chapter ix but the privations, or rather the hardships, of lowood lessened.
Flowers peeped out amongst the leaves snow drops, crocuses, purple auriculas, and golden eyed pansies.
Assuredly, pleasant enough but whether healthy or not is another question.
Classes were broken up, rules relaxed.
And where, meantime, was helen burns?
Why did i not spend these sweet days of liberty with her?
Or was i so worthless as to have grown tired of her pure society?
Very poorly, was the answer.
Is it her mr. bates has been to see?
And what does he say about her?
He says she'll not be here long.
She is in miss temple's room, said the nurse.
May i go up and speak to her?
My eye sought helen, and feared to find death.
I still recoiled at the dread of seeing a corpse.
I whispered softly, are you awake?
Can it be you, jane?
She asked, in her own gentle voice.
Why are you come here, jane?
It is past eleven o'clock i heard it strike some minutes since.
You came to bid me good bye, then you are just in time probably.
Are you going somewhere, helen?
Yes to my long home my last home.
I did so she put her arm over me, and i nestled close to her.
By dying young, i shall escape great sufferings.
But where are you going to, helen?
I believe i have faith i am going to god.
My maker and yours, who will never destroy what he created.
And shall i see you again, helen, when i die?
Again i questioned, but this time only in thought.
Presently she said, in the sweetest tone how comfortable i am!
I'll stay with you, dear helen no one shall take me away.
She kissed me, and i her, and we both soon slumbered.
I was asleep, and helen was dead.
But this is not to be a regular autobiography.
The school, thus improved, became in time a truly useful and noble institution.
But destiny, in the shape of the rev.
I walked about the chamber most of the time.
I went to my window, opened it, and looked out.
Here a bell, ringing the hour of supper, called me downstairs.
How i wished sleep would silence her.
That must be matter of fact.
Can i not get so much of my own will?
Is not the thing feasible?
How do people do to get a new place?
They apply to friends, i suppose i have no friends.
Those who want situations advertise you must advertise in the shire herald .
I know nothing about advertising.
Address, j.e., post office, lowton, shire.
Are there any letters for j.e.?
Various duties awaited me on my arrival.
Here the socket of the candle dropped, and the wick went out.
She obligingly consented to act as mediatrix in the matter.
I now busied myself in preparations the fortnight passed rapidly.
The carrier, no doubt, i thought, and ran downstairs without inquiry.
I could have told her anywhere!
Cried the individual who stopped my progress and took my hand.
In another second i was embracing and kissing her rapturously bessie!
That is my little boy, said bessie directly.
Then you are married, bessie?
And you don't live at gateshead?
I live at the lodge the old porter has left.
Well, and how do they all get on?
But bobby preferred sidling over to his mother.
You're not grown so very tall, miss jane, nor so very stout, continued mrs. leaven.
Georgiana is handsome, i suppose, bessie?
Oh, he is not doing so well as his mama could wish.
What does he look like?
Did she send you here, bessie?
I am afraid you are disappointed in me, bessie.
I dare say you are clever, though, continued bessie, by way of solace.
Can you play on the piano?
The miss reeds could not play as well!
I always said you would surpass them in learning and can you draw?
That is one of my paintings over the chimney piece.
Well, that is beautiful, miss jane!
Yes, bessie, i can both read it and speak it.
And you can work on muslin and canvas?
Oh, you are quite a lady, miss jane!
There was something i wanted to ask you.
Have you ever heard anything from your father's kinsfolk, the eyres?
He looked quite a gentleman, and i believe he was your father's brother.
What foreign country was he going to, bessie?
Yes, that is it that is the very word.
My robert believes he was a wine merchant.
Very likely, i returned or perhaps clerk or agent to a wine merchant.
Reader, though i look comfortably accommodated, i am not very tranquil in my mind.
I bethought myself to ring the bell.
Is there a place in this neighbourhood called thornfield?
I asked of the waiter who answered the summons.
I don't know, ma'am i'll inquire at the bar.
He vanished, but reappeared instantly is your name eyre, miss?
Person here waiting for you.
This will be your luggage, i suppose?
A matter of six miles.
How long shall we be before we get there?
Happen an hour and a half.
He fastened the car door, climbed to his own seat outside, and we set off.
Let the worst come to the worst, i can advertise again.
How far are we on our road now, i wonder?
Will you walk this way, ma'am?
How do you do, my dear?
Yes, you are right do sit down.
Now, then, draw nearer to the fire, she continued.
You've brought your luggage with you, haven't you, my dear?
I'll see it carried into your room, she said, and bustled out.
Shall i have the pleasure of seeing miss fairfax to night?
I asked, when i had partaken of what she offered me.
What did you say, my dear?
I am a little deaf, returned the good lady, approaching her ear to my mouth.
I repeated the question more distinctly.
Oh, you mean miss varens!
Varens is the name of your future pupil.
Then she is not your daughter?
No, i have no family.
If you have got your feet well warmed, i'll show you your bedroom.
She took her candle, and i followed her from the room.
My couch had no thorns in it that night my solitary room no fears.
And why had i these aspirations and these regrets?
The hall door, which was half of glass, stood open i stepped over the threshold.
I see you are an early riser.
How do you like thornfield?
I told her i liked it very much.
The owner of thornfield, she responded quietly.
Did you not know he was called rochester?
I thought, i continued, thornfield belonged to you.
Bless you, child what an idea!
I am only the housekeeper the manager.
And the little girl my pupil!
She is mr. rochester's ward he commissioned me to find a governess for her.
He intended to have her brought up in shire, i believe.
Here she comes, with her 'bonne,' as she calls her nurse.
Good morning, miss adela, said mrs. fairfax.
Said she, pointing to me, and addressing her nurse who answered mais oui, certainement.
I inquired, amazed at hearing the french language.
She will be glad nobody here understands her madame fairfax is all english.
And i was sick, and so was sophie, and so was mr. rochester.
I nearly fell out of mine it was like a shelf.
And mademoiselle what is your name?
Can you understand her when she runs on so fast?
I lived long ago with mama but she is gone to the holy virgin.
Mama used to teach me to dance and sing, and to say verses.
Shall i let you hear me sing now?
Adele sang the canzonette tunefully enough, and with the naivete of her age.
Assuming an attitude, she began, la ligue des rats fable de la fontaine.
Was it your mama who taught you that piece?
Yes, and she just used to say it in this way 'qu' avez vous donc?
Lui dit un de ces rats parlez!
Now shall i dance for you?
I think she is poor, for she had not so fine a house as mama.
I was not long there.
Mrs. fairfax was dusting some vases of fine purple spar, which stood on a sideboard.
Yes this is the dining room.
In what order you keep these rooms, mrs. fairfax!
Is mr. rochester an exacting, fastidious sort of man?
Oh, yes the family have always been respected here.
Well, but, leaving his land out of the question, do you like him?
Is he liked for himself?
But has he no peculiarities?
What, in short, is his character?
His character is unimpeachable, i suppose.
I dare say he is clever, but i never had much conversation with him.
In what way is he peculiar?
This was all the account i got from mrs. fairfax of her employer and mine.
Do the servants sleep in these rooms?
So i think you have no ghost, then?
None that i ever heard of, returned mrs. fairfax, smiling.
Nor any traditions of one?
No legends or ghost stories?
Yes 'after life's fitful fever they sleep well,' i muttered.
Where are you going now, mrs. fairfax?
For she was moving away.
On to the leads will you come and see the view from thence?
No feature in the scene was extraordinary, but all was pleasing.
It was a curious laugh distinct, formal, mirthless.
I called out for i now heard her descending the great stairs.
Did you hear that loud laugh?
Some of the servants, very likely, she answered perhaps grace poole.
Yes, plainly i often hear her she sews in one of these rooms.
Sometimes leah is with her they are frequently noisy together.
The laugh was repeated in its low, syllabic tone, and terminated in an odd murmur.
Too much noise, grace, said mrs. fairfax.
Grace curtseyed silently and went in.
By the bye, how have you got on with your new pupil this morning?
Adele came running to meet us in the hall, exclaiming mesdames, vous etes servies!
Adding, j'ai bien faim, moi!
We found dinner ready, and waiting for us in mrs. fairfax's room.
Many, no doubt and i shall be called discontented.
October, november, december passed away.
Jeannette, with a kiss i set out.
The horse followed, a tall steed, and on its back a rider.
The man, the human being, broke the spell at once.
No gytrash was this, only a traveller taking the short cut to millcote.
And a clattering tumble, arrested my attention.
I felt no fear of him, and but little shyness.
I had hardly ever seen a handsome youth never in my life spoken to one.
You live just below do you mean at that house with the battlements?
Do you know mr. rochester?
No, i have never seen him.
He is not resident, then?
Can you tell me where he is?
You are not a servant at the hall, of course.
He seemed puzzled to decide what i was i helped him.
He repeated deuce take me, if i had not forgotten!
And again my raiment underwent scrutiny.
You have not an umbrella that i can use as a stick?
The traveller waited and watched for some time, and at last he laughed.
Excuse me, he continued necessity compels me to make you useful.
I sought it and found it.
I took up my muff and walked on.
I did not like re entering thornfield.
With master mr. rochester he is just arrived.
And is mrs. fairfax with him?
Did the horse fall in hay lane?
Yes, coming down hill it slipped on some ice.
Bring me a candle will you leah?
J'ai dit qu'oui car c'est vrai, n'est ce pas, mademoiselle?
I let down the curtain and went back to the fireside.
When is his tea time?
Oh, at six o'clock he keeps early hours in the country.
You had better change your frock now i will go with you and fasten it.
Is it necessary to change my frock?
Yes, you had better i always dress for the evening when mr. rochester is here.
You want a brooch, said mrs. fairfax.
Here is miss eyre, sir, said mrs. fairfax, in her quiet way.
He bowed, still not taking his eyes from the group of the dog and child.
At this moment i am not disposed to accost her.
I sat down quite disembarrassed.
He went on as a statue would, that is, he neither spoke nor moved.
Madam, i should like some tea, was the sole rejoinder she got.
I and adele went to the table but the master did not leave his couch.
Will you hand mr. rochester's cup?
Said mrs. fairfax to me adele might perhaps spill it.
Did you expect a present, miss eyre?
Are you fond of presents?
And he searched my face with eyes that i saw were dark, irate, and piercing.
But what do you think?
And one should consider all, before pronouncing an opinion as to its nature.
Oh, don't fall back on over modesty!
Said mr. rochester, and he took his tea in silence.
You have been resident in my house three months?
And you came from ?
From lowood school, in shire.
You must be tenacious of life.
I thought half the time in such a place would have done up any constitution!
No wonder you have rather the look of another world.
I marvelled where you had got that sort of face.
Nor ever had, i suppose do you remember them?
And so you were waiting for your people when you sat on that stile?
For the men in green it was a proper moonlight evening for them.
No none that i ever saw.
Where do your brothers and sisters live?
I have no brothers or sisters.
Who recommended you to come here?
I advertised, and mrs. fairfax answered my advertisement.
She began by felling my horse.
I have to thank her for this sprain.
Miss eyre, have you ever lived in a town?
Have you seen much society?
None but the pupils and teachers of lowood, and now the inmates of thornfield.
A novice not worship her priest!
I disliked mr. brocklehurst and i was not alone in the feeling.
And was that the head and front of his offending?
What age were you when you went to lowood?
And you stayed there eight years you are now, then, eighteen?
And now what did you learn at lowood?
Of course that is the established answer.
Go into the library i mean, if you please.
I departed, obeying his directions.
He called out in a few minutes.
I closed the piano and returned.
Mr. rochester continued adele showed me some sketches this morning, which she said were yours.
I don't know whether they were entirely of your doing probably a master aided you?
Then i will say nothing, and you shall judge for yourself, sir.
I brought the portfolio from the library.
Approach the table, said he and i wheeled it to his couch.
Adele and mrs. fairfax drew near to see the pictures.
He deliberately scrutinised each sketch and painting.
Three he laid aside the others, when he had examined them, he swept from him.
I perceive those pictures were done by one hand was that hand yours?
And when did you find time to do them?
They have taken much time, and some thought.
Where did you get your copies?
That head i see now on your shoulders?
Has it other furniture of the same kind within?
I should think it may have i should hope better.
He spread the pictures before him, and again surveyed them alternately.
The subjects had, indeed, risen vividly on my mind.
These pictures were in water colours.
Were you happy when you painted these pictures?
I was absorbed, sir yes, and i was happy.
That is not saying much.
Did you sit at them long each day?
And you felt self satisfied with the result of your ardent labours?
Not quite you have secured the shadow of your thought but no more, probably.
As to the thoughts, they are elfish.
These eyes in the evening star you must have seen in a dream.
How could you make them look so clear, and yet not at all brilliant?
For the planet above quells their rays.
And what meaning is that in their solemn depth?
And who taught you to paint wind?
There is a high gale in that sky, and on this hill top.
Where did you see latmos?
I think so he is very changeful and abrupt.
Family troubles, for one thing.
But he has no family.
Not now, but he has had or, at least, relatives.
He lost his elder brother a few years since.
Nine years is a tolerable time.
I believe there were some misunderstandings between them.
The old gentleman was fond of money, and anxious to keep the family estate together.
Why should he shun it?
Perhaps he thinks it gloomy.
Chapter xiv for several subsequent days i saw little of mr. rochester.
She appeared to know it by instinct.
Exclaimed she, running towards it.
And then remained absorbed in ecstatic contemplation.
Well, come forward be seated here.
He drew a chair near his own.
Nor do i particularly affect simple minded old ladies.
Good evening, madam i sent to you for a charitable purpose.
You examine me, miss eyre, said he do you think me handsome?
What do you mean by it?
Sir, i was too plain i beg your pardon.
You ought to have replied no such thing.
Beauty of little consequence, indeed!
Go on what fault do you find with me, pray?
I suppose i have all my limbs and all my features like any other man?
Just so i think so and you shall be answerable for it.
Criticise me does my forehead not please you?
Now, ma'am, am i a fool?
Yes does that leave hope for me?
Of my final re transformation from india rubber back to flesh?
Young lady, i am disposed to be gregarious and communicative to night.
Instead of speaking, i smiled and not a very complacent or submissive smile either.
You are dumb, miss eyre.
I put my request in an absurd, almost insolent form.
Miss eyre, i beg your pardon.
Ask me questions, and i will do my best to answer them.
Do as you please, sir.
The smile is very well, said he, catching instantly the passing expression but speak too.
You are my paid subordinate, are you?
Oh yes, i had forgotten the salary!
Well then, on that mercenary ground, will you agree to let me hector a little?
And so may you, i thought.
I envy you your peace of mind, your clean conscience, your unpolluted memory.
How was your memory when you were eighteen, sir?
I was your equal at eighteen quite your equal.
Do you wonder that i avow this to you?
How can you guess all this, sir?
I wish i had stood firm god knows i do!
Repentance is said to be its cure, sir.
It is not its cure.
Then you will degenerate still more, sir.
Possibly yet why should i, if i can get sweet, fresh pleasure?
It will sting it will taste bitter, sir.
And who talks of error now?
I scarcely think the notion that flittered across my brain was an error.
Distrust it, sir it is not a true angel.
Once more, how do you know?
I feel sure it will work you more misery if you listen to it.
Here, come in, bonny wanderer!
I am laying down good intentions, which i believe durable as flint.
Certainly, my associates and pursuits shall be other than they have been.
And better so much better as pure ore is than foul dross.
They cannot be, sir, if they require a new statute to legalise them.
So it is but i swear by my household gods not to abuse it.
You are human and fallible.
I am so are you what then?
That of saying of any strange, unsanctioned line of action, 'let it be right.
Let it be right' the very words you have pronounced them.
To put adele to bed it is past her bedtime.
You are afraid of me, because i talk like a sphynx.
Your language is enigmatical, sir but though i am bewildered, i am certainly not afraid.
You are afraid your self love dreads a blunder.
In that sense i do feel apprehensive i have no wish to talk nonsense.
Do you never laugh, miss eyre?
You are still bent on going?
It has struck nine, sir.
Never mind, wait a minute adele is not ready to go to bed yet.
While talking to you, i have also occasionally watched adele .
Il faut que je l'essaie!
Cried she, 'et a l'instant meme!
And she rushed out of the room.
Ere long, adele's little foot was heard tripping across the hall.
She entered, transformed as her guardian had predicted.
Est ce que ma robe va bien?
Cried she, bounding forwards et mes souliers?
Tenez, je crois que je vais danser!
I'll explain all this some day.
Chapter xv mr. rochester did, on a future occasion, explain it.
This passion celine had professed to return with even superior ardour.
I had as i deserved to have the fate of all other spoonies.
It was moonlight and gaslight besides, and very still and serene.
You never felt jealousy, did you, miss eyre?
Of course not i need not ask you because you never felt love.
We were ascending the avenue when he thus paused the hall was before us.
Like it if you dare!
Adele here ran before him with her shuttlecock.
He cried harshly keep at a distance, child or go in to sophie!
Oh, i had forgotten celine!
He exclaimed, suddenly starting again from the point.
After this digression he proceeded i remained in the balcony.
They will come to her boudoir, no doubt,' thought i 'let me prepare an ambush.
My eye was quickly at the aperture.
Celine's chamber maid entered, lit a lamp, left it on the table, and withdrew.
The contrast struck me at the time and adele here came running up again.
In that case i must abridge.
Oh, that is the light in which you view it!
Well, i must go in now and you too it darkens.
I, indeed, talked comparatively little, but i heard him talk with relish.
And was mr. rochester now ugly in my eyes?
What alienates him from the house?
Will he leave it again soon?
If he does go, the change will be doleful.
I rose and sat up in bed, listening.
I tried again to sleep but my heart beat anxiously my inward tranquillity was broken.
The clock, far down in the hall, struck two.
I said, who is there?
I was chilled with fear.
The idea calmed me somewhat i lay down.
But it was not fated that i should sleep that night.
And is she possessed with a devil?
Impossible now to remain longer by myself i must go to mrs. fairfax.
There was a candle burning just outside, and on the matting in the gallery.
Tongues of flame darted round the bed the curtains were on fire.
In the midst of blaze and vapour, mr. rochester lay stretched motionless, in deep sleep.
I shook him, but he only murmured and turned the smoke had stupefied him.
In the name of all the elves in christendom, is that jane eyre?
What have you done with me, witch, sorceress?
Who is in the room besides you?
Have you plotted to drown me?
I will fetch you a candle, sir and, in heaven's name, get up.
Somebody has plotted something you cannot too soon find out who and what it is.
I did run i brought the candle which still remained in the gallery.
Shall i call mrs. fairfax?
No what the deuce would you call her for?
Then i will fetch leah, and wake john and his wife.
Not at all just be still.
You have a shawl on.
Now place your feet on the stool, to keep them out of the wet.
I am going to leave you a few minutes.
I shall take the candle.
Remain where you are till i return be as still as a mouse.
I must pay a visit to the second storey.
Don't move, remember, or call any one.
He went i watched the light withdraw.
I was left in total darkness.
I listened for some noise, but heard nothing.
A very long time elapsed.
I hope it is he, thought i, and not something worse.
He re entered, pale and very gloomy.
He made no reply, but stood with his arms folded, looking on the ground.
No, sir, only the candlestick on the ground.
But you heard an odd laugh?
You have heard that laugh before, i should think, or something like it?
She is a singular person.
Grace poole you have guessed it.
She is, as you say, singular very.
Well, i shall reflect on the subject.
You are no talking fool say nothing about it.
I will account for this state of affairs and now return to your own room.
It is near four in two hours the servants will be up.
Good night, then, sir, said i, departing.
He seemed surprised very inconsistently so, as he had just told me to go.
He exclaimed, are you quitting me already, and in that way?
You said i might go, sir.
Why, you have saved my life!
Snatched me from a horrible and excruciating death!
And you walk past me as if we were mutual strangers!
There is no debt, benefit, burden, obligation, in the case.
Strange energy was in his voice, strange fire in his look.
I am glad i happened to be awake, i said and then i was going.
Yes, and standing in a pool!
But he still retained my hand, and i could not free it.
I bethought myself of an expedient.
I think i hear mrs. fairfax move, sir, said i.
Well, leave me he relaxed his fingers, and i was gone.
I regained my couch, but never thought of sleep.
Sense would resist delirium judgment would warn passion.
Too feverish to rest, i rose as soon as day dawned.
There were exclamations of what a mercy master was not burnt in his bed!
It is always dangerous to keep a candle lit at night.
How providential that he had presence of mind to think of the water jug!
I wonder he waked nobody!
Leah stood up in the window seat, rubbing the panes of glass dimmed with smoke.
That woman was no other than grace poole.
I will put her to some test, thought i such absolute impenetrability is past comprehension.
Good morning, grace, i said.
I thought i heard the servants all talking together a while ago.
Did no one hear him move?
I was not dreaming, i said, with some warmth, for her brazen coolness provoked me.
Again she looked at me and with the same scrutinising and conscious eye.
Have you told master that you heard a laugh?
I have not had the opportunity of speaking to him this morning.
You did not think of opening your door and looking out into the gallery?
She appeared to be cross questioning me, attempting to draw from me information unawares.
On the contrary, said i, i bolted my door.
She wants to know my habits, that she may lay her plans accordingly!
Just a morsel, and a taste of cheese, that's all.
Why had he enjoined me, too, to secrecy?
Mr. rochester is an amateur of the decided and eccentric grace is eccentric at least.
My supposition cannot be correct.
I well remembered all language, glance, and tone seemed at the moment vividly renewed.
She looked up with a sort of start.
I am hot, adele, with stooping!
She went on sketching i went on thinking.
Evening approaches, said i, as i looked towards the window.
The door remained shut darkness only came in through the window.
A tread creaked on the stairs at last.
Is mr. rochester gone anywhere?
I did not know he was out.
Oh, he set off the moment he had breakfasted!
Do you expect him back to night?
Are there ladies at the leas?
She came here to a christmas ball and party mr. rochester gave.
You saw her, you say, mrs. fairfax what was she like?
And what was she like?
She was greatly admired, of course?
Yes, indeed and not only for her beauty, but for her accomplishments.
She was one of the ladies who sang a gentleman accompanied her on the piano.
She and mr. rochester sang a duet.
I was not aware he could sing.
He has a fine bass voice, and an excellent taste for music.
And miss ingram what sort of a voice had she?
And this beautiful and accomplished lady, she is not yet married?
It appears not i fancy neither she nor her sister have very large fortunes.
He is rich, is he not?
More unequal matches are made every day.
True yet i should scarcely fancy mr. rochester would entertain an idea of the sort.
But you eat nothing you have scarcely tasted since you began tea.
No i am too thirsty to eat.
Will you let me have another cup?
You , i said, a favourite with mr. rochester?
You gifted with the power of pleasing him?
You of importance to him in any way?
Could not even self interest make you wiser?
You repeated to yourself this morning the brief scene of last night?
Cover your face and be ashamed!
He said something in praise of your eyes, did he?
Open their bleared lids and look on your own accursed senselessness!
You revert to mr. rochester as a model!
I will endure only sense and resolution.
It is from the master, said she, as she looked at the direction.
Now i suppose we shall know whether we are to expect his return or not.
And mrs. fairfax swallowed her breakfast and hastened away to commence operations.
The three days were, as she had foretold, busy enough.
The party were expected to arrive on thursday afternoon, in time for dinner at six.
And she is laying by she goes every quarter to the bank at millcote.
It is too soon for her to give up business.
She is a good hand, i daresay, said the charwoman.
I heard the woman whisper.
Leah shook her head, and the conversation was of course dropped.
It gets late, said mrs. fairfax, entering in rustling state.
She went to the window.
Well, john , any news?
They're coming, ma'am, was the answer.
They'll be here in ten minutes.
Adele flew to the window.
Exclaimed mrs. fairfax, and away she hurried to her post below.
Don't you feel hungry, adele?
Mais oui, mademoiselle voila cinq ou six heures que nous n'avons pas mange.
I found adele peeping through the schoolroom door, which she held ajar.
Oh, i wish i might go to them!
Do you think mr. rochester will send for us by and bye, after dinner?
No, indeed, i don't mr. rochester has something else to think about.
It was near one before the gentlemen and ladies sought their chambers.
Yes, i daresay no doubt he admires her.
You will see her this evening, answered mrs. fairfax.
I will not give him that trouble, i answered.
I will go, if no better may be but i don't like it.
Shall you be there, mrs. fairfax?
No i pleaded off, and he admitted my plea.
Will these people remain long, do you think?
Perhaps two or three weeks, certainly not more.
Adele brought her stool to my feet ere long she touched my knee.
Est ce que je ne puis pas prendrie une seule de ces fleurs magnifiques, mademoiselle?
Seulement pour completer ma toilette.
You think too much of your 'toilette,' adele but you may have a flower.
And i took a rose from a vase and fastened it in her sash.
I knew their names afterwards, and may as well mention them now.
First, there was mrs. eshton and two of her daughters.
She had evidently been a handsome woman, and was well preserved still.
Colonel dent was less showy but, i thought, more lady like.
She had a slight figure, a pale, gentle face, and fair hair.
They were all three of the loftiest stature of women.
Blanche and mary were of equal stature, straight and tall as poplars.
Mary was too slim for her height, but blanche was moulded like a dian.
I regarded her, of course, with special interest.
Whether it were such as i should fancy likely to suit mr. rochester's taste.
It was not, however, so saturnine a pride!
Genius is said to be self conscious.
She entered into a discourse on botany with the gentle mrs. dent.
The sisters were both attired in spotless white.
I could not tell i did not know his taste in female beauty.
Mrs. dent had kindly taken her hand, and given her a kiss.
Amy and louisa eshton had cried out simultaneously what a love of a child!
At last coffee is brought in, and the gentlemen are summoned.
Again the arch yawns they come.
And where is mr. rochester?
How near had i approached him at that moment!
What had occurred since, calculated to change his and my relative positions?
Yet now, how distant, how far estranged we were!
So far estranged, that i did not expect him to come and speak to me.
Most true is it that beauty is in the eye of the gazer.
He made me love him without looking at me.
I compared him with his guests.
He was talking, at the moment, to louisa and amy eshton.
Every good, true, vigorous feeling i have gathers impulsively round him.
Colonel dent and mr. eshton argue on politics their wives listen.
The two proud dowagers, lady lynn and lady ingram, confabulate together.
With whom will blanche ingram pair?
She is standing alone at the table, bending gracefully over an album.
Mr. rochester, i thought you were not fond of children?
Then, what induced you to take charge of such a little doll as that?
Where did you pick her up?
I did not pick her up she was left on my hands.
You should have sent her to school.
I could not afford it schools are so dear.
There she is still, behind the window curtain.
I feared or should i say, hoped?
I have not considered the subject, said he indifferently, looking straight before him.
No, you men never do consider economy and common sense.
Did you speak, my own?
My dearest, don't mention governesses the word makes me nervous.
I have suffered a martyrdom from their incompetency and caprice.
I thank heaven i have now done with them!
Said her ladyship, i hope it may do her good!
But my curiosity will be past its appetite it craves food now.
Ask blanche she is nearer you than i. oh, don't refer him to me, mama!
I have just one word to say of the whole tribe they are a nuisance.
Not that i ever suffered much from them i took care to turn the tables.
Mary was always too sleepy to join in a plot with spirit.
Theodore, do you remember those merry days?
Did you not, my lady mother?
Am i right, baroness ingram, of ingram park?
My lily flower, you are right now, as always.
Then no more need be said change the subject.
She was never cross with us was she, louisa?
Mr. rochester, do you second my motion?
Madam, i support you on this point, as on every other.
Then on me be the onus of bringing it forward.
Signior eduardo, are you in voice to night?
Donna bianca, if you command it, i will be.
Who would not be the rizzio of so divine a mary?
Cried she, tossing her head with all its curls, as she moved to the piano.
Now which of you most resembles bothwell?
I should say the preference lies with you, responded colonel dent.
On my honour, i am much obliged to you, was the reply.
Oh, i am so sick of the young men of the present day!
Exclaimed she, rattling away at the instrument.
As if loveliness were not the special prerogative of woman her legitimate appanage and heritage!
Such should be my device, were i a man.
Mr. rochester, now sing, and i will play for you.
I am all obedience, was the response.
Here then is a corsair song.
Know that i doat on corsairs and for that reason, sing it con spirito .
Commands from miss ingram's lips would put spirit into a mug of milk and water.
That is offering a premium on incapacity i shall now endeavour to fail.
If you err wilfully, i shall devise a proportionate punishment.
Said she, and again touching the piano, she commenced an accompaniment in spirited style.
I am very well, sir.
Why did you not come and speak to me in the room?
I answered i did not wish to disturb you, as you seemed engaged, sir.
What have you been doing during my absence?
Nothing particular teaching adele as usual.
And getting a good deal paler than you were as i saw at first sight.
Did you take any cold that night you half drowned me?
Return to the drawing room you are deserting too early.
He looked at me for a minute.
And a little depressed, he said.
Now go, and send sophie for adele.
Good night, my he stopped, bit his lip, and abruptly left me.
No, i heard her say she looks too stupid for any game of the sort.
Ere long a bell tinkled, and the curtain drew up.
Mr. rochester bowed, and the curtain fell.
A considerable interval elapsed before it again rose.
Its second rising displayed a more elaborately prepared scene than the last.
Presently advanced into view miss ingram.
It was eliezer and rebecca the camels only were wanting.
Colonel dent, their spokesman, demanded the tableau of the whole whereupon the curtain again descended.
As he moved, a chain clanked to his wrists were attached fetters.
Exclaimed colonel dent, and the charade was solved.
Mr. rochester led in miss ingram she was complimenting him on his acting.
Is all the soot washed from my face?
He asked, turning it towards her.
Yes the more's the pity!
Nothing could be more becoming to your complexion than that ruffian's rouge.
You would like a hero of the road then?
She giggled, and her colour rose.
Now, dent, continued mr. rochester, it is your turn.
And as the other party withdrew, he and his band took the vacated seats.
Miss ingram was a mark beneath jealousy she was too inferior to excite the feeling.
Pardon the seeming paradox i mean what i say.
Other eyes besides mine watched these manifestations of character watched them closely, keenly, shrewdly.
Because, when she failed, i saw how she might have succeeded.
Surely she cannot truly like him, or not like him with true affection!
How will she manage to please him when they are married?
Now i saw no bad.
The dowagers ingram and lynn sought solace in a quiet game at cards.
A post chaise was approaching.
What can possess him to come home in that style?
He rode mesrour , did he not, when he went out?
And pilot was with him what has he done with the animals?
Exclaimed miss ingram you tiresome monkey!
Who perched you up in the window to give false intelligence?
And she cast on me an angry glance, as if i were in fault.
Some parleying was audible in the hall, and soon the new comer entered.
He bowed to lady ingram, as deeming her the eldest lady present.
The sound of the dressing bell dispersed the party.
He had spoken of mr. rochester as an old friend.
These last were discussing the stranger they both called him a beautiful man.
And what a sweet tempered forehead he has!
Would you like to see her?
Surely, colonel, cried lady ingram, you would not encourage such a low impostor?
Dismiss her, by all means, at once!
Inquired the misses eshton, in a breath.
A shockingly ugly old creature, miss almost as black as a crock.
Why, she's a real sorceress!
Let us have her in, of course.
My dear boys, what are you thinking about?
I cannot possibly countenance any such inconsistent proceeding, chimed in the dowager ingram.
I have a curiosity to hear my fortune told therefore, sam, order the beldame forward.
Cried all the juveniles, both ladies and gentlemen.
Let her come it will be excellent sport!
She looks such a rough one, said he.
Ejaculated miss ingram, and the man went.
She won't come now, said he.
She says it's not her mission to appear before the 'vulgar herd' .
You see now, my queenly blanche, began lady ingram, she encroaches.
Is there a fire in the library?
Yes, ma'am but she looks such a tinkler.
Again sam vanished and mystery, animation, expectation rose to full flow once more.
She's ready now, said the footman, as he reappeared.
She wishes to know who will be her first visitor.
Tell her, sam, a gentleman is coming.
By jove, she has taste!
Lady ingram thought it le cas to wring her hands which she did accordingly.
Miss mary declared she felt, for her part, she never dared venture.
Amy and louisa eshton tittered under their breath, and looked a little frightened.
The minutes passed very slowly fifteen were counted before the library door again opened.
Miss ingram returned to us through the arch.
Would she take it as a joke?
What did she say, sister?
Is she a real fortune teller?
Now, now, good people, returned miss ingram, don't press upon me.
Miss ingram took a book, leant back in her chair, and so declined further conversation.
I am sure she is something not right!
They cried, one and all.
She told us such things!
She knows all about us!
And they sank breathless into the various seats the gentlemen hastened to bring them.
I thought it must be you there is no one else for it.
What shall i tell her?
No, sam, return to the kitchen i am not in the least afraid.
Nor was i but i was a good deal interested and excited.
Well, and you want your fortune told?
She said, in a voice as decided as her glance, as harsh as her features.
I have and a quick eye and a quick brain.
You need them all in your trade.
I do especially when i've customers like you to deal with.
Why don't you turn pale?
Why don't you consult my art?
I will, in few words.
Yes just so, in your circumstances but find me another precisely placed as you are.
It would be easy to find you thousands.
You could scarcely find me one.
The materials are all prepared there only wants a movement to combine them.
Chance laid them somewhat apart let them be once approached and bliss results.
I never could guess a riddle in my life.
If you wish me to speak more plainly, show me your palm.
And i must cross it with silver, i suppose?
She approached her face to the palm, and pored over it without touching it.
It is too fine, said she.
Destiny is not written there.
I believe you, said i.
Kneel, and lift up your head.
Now you are coming to reality, i said, as i obeyed her.
I shall begin to put some faith in you presently.
I knelt within half a yard of her.
I feel tired often, sleepy sometimes, but seldom sad.
Thought i there is diablerie in the business after all, then!
Is there not one face you study?
One figure whose movements you follow with at least curiosity?
I like to observe all the faces and all the figures.
But do you never single one from the rest or it may be, two?
What tale do you like best to hear?
Oh, i have not much choice!
And do you like that monotonous theme?
Positively, i don't care about it it is nothing to me.
You know and perhaps think well of.
I don't know the gentlemen here.
You don't know the gentlemen here?
You have not exchanged a syllable with one of them?
Will you say that of the master of the house!
He is not at home.
Mr. rochester has a right to enjoy the society of his guests.
The eagerness of a listener quickens the tongue of a narrator.
I cannot remember detecting gratitude in his face.
And what did you detect, if not gratitude?
You have seen love have you not?
And, looking forward, you have seen him married, and beheld his bride happy?
Your witch's skill is rather at fault sometimes.
What the devil have you seen, then?
Never mind i came here to inquire, not to confess.
Is it known that mr. rochester is to be married?
Yes and to the beautiful miss ingram.
Your fortune is yet doubtful when i examined your face, one trait contradicted another.
Chance has meted you a measure of happiness that i know.
I knew it before i came here this evening.
She has laid it carefully on one side for you.
I saw her do it.
Kneel again on the rug.
Don't keep me long the fire scorches me.
She did not stoop towards me, but only gazed, leaning back in her chair.
That feature too is propitious.
I need not sell my soul to buy bliss.
Well said, forehead your declaration shall be respected.
I think i rave in a kind of exquisite delirium.
I should wish now to protract this moment ad infinitum but i dare not.
So far i have governed myself thoroughly.
Rise, miss eyre leave me the play is played out'.
Did i wake or sleep?
I got up, but did not go.
Well, jane, do you know me?
There, then 'off, ye lendings!
And mr. rochester stepped out of his disguise.
Now, sir, what a strange idea!
But well carried out, eh?
With the ladies you must have managed well.
You did not act the character of a gipsy with me.
What character did i act?
It is scarcely fair, sir.
Do you forgive me, jane?
I cannot tell till i have thought it all over.
Oh, you have been very correct very careful, very sensible.
I reflected, and thought, on the whole, i had.
Something of masquerade i suspected.
I had never thought of mr. rochester.
Well, said he, what are you musing about?
What does that grave smile signify?
Wonder and self congratulation, sir.
I have your permission to retire now, i suppose?
Discussing the gipsy, i daresay.
Let me hear what they said about me.
I had better not stay long, sir it must be near eleven o'clock.
No who can it be?
I expected no one is he gone?
Did he give his name?
Do you feel ill, sir?
Jane, i've got a blow i've got a blow, jane!
Oh, lean on me, sir.
Jane, you offered me your shoulder once before let me have it now.
Yes, sir, yes and my arm.
He sat down, and made me sit beside him.
Can i help you, sir?
I'd give my life to serve you.
Jane, if aid is wanted, i'll seek it at your hands i promise you that.
Tell me what to do, i'll try, at least, to do it.
Every one seemed in high glee laughter and conversation were general and animated.
I filled a wine glass , and i returned to the library.
Mr. rochester's extreme pallor had disappeared, and he looked once more firm and stern.
He took the glass from my hand.
Here is to your health, ministrant spirit!
He swallowed the contents and returned it to me.
What are they doing, jane?
They don't look grave and mysterious, as if they had heard something strange?
Not at all they are full of jests and gaiety.
Turn them out of the room, sir, if i could.
Would you go with them?
I rather think not, sir i should have more pleasure in staying with you.
Yes, sir, to comfort you, as well as i could.
And if they laid you under a ban for adhering to me?
Then, you could dare censure for my sake?
The company all stared at me as i passed straight among them.
He spoke cheerfully the gay tones set my heart at ease.
My pulse stopped my heart stood still my stretched arm was paralysed.
The cry died, and was not renewed.
The thing delivering such utterance must rest ere it could repeat the effort.
It came out of the third storey for it passed overhead.
A chamber door opened some one ran, or rushed, along the gallery.
Another step stamped on the flooring above and something fell and there was silence.
Gentlemen and ladies alike had quitted their beds and oh!
Was demanded confusedly on all hands.
But for the moonlight they would have been in complete darkness.
Where the devil is rochester?
I cannot find him in his bed.
Be composed, all of you i'm coming.
What awful event has taken place?
Let us know the worst at once!
It's a mere rehearsal of much ado about nothing.
Ladies, keep off, or i shall wax dangerous.
And dangerous he looked his black eyes darted sparks.
Gentlemen, have the goodness to set the ladies the example.
Miss ingram, i am sure you will not fail in evincing superiority to idle terrors.
Amy and louisa, return to your nests like a pair of doves, as you are.
Not, however, to go to bed on the contrary, i began and dressed myself carefully.
I dressed, then, to be ready for emergencies.
It seemed to me that some event must follow the strange cry, struggle, and call.
It seemed that sleep and night had resumed their empire.
Meantime the moon declined she was about to set.
Asked the voice i expected to hear, viz., my master's.
Mr. rochester stood in the gallery holding a light.
I want you, he said come this way take your time, and make no noise.
My slippers were thin i could walk the matted floor as softly as a cat.
Have you a sponge in your room?
He asked in a whisper.
Have you any salts volatile salts?
Go back and fetch both.
You don't turn sick at the sight of blood?
I think i shall not i have never been tried yet.
I felt a thrill while i answered him but no coldness, and no faintness.
I put my fingers into his.
Warm and steady, was his remark he turned the key and opened the door.
Mr. mason shortly unclosed his eyes he groaned.
Don't be so overcome, man bear up!
He watched me a second, then saying, remember!
No conversation, he left the room.
I must keep to my post, however.
Then my own thoughts worried me.
And why had the fury flown at him?
I had heard mr. rochester assign him an apartment below what brought him here!
And why, now, was he so tame under the violence or treachery done him?
Why did he so quietly submit to the concealment mr. rochester enforced?
Why did mr. rochester enforce this concealment?
It could not have lasted more than two hours many a week has seemed shorter.
Mr. rochester entered, and with him the surgeon he had been to fetch.
But is he fit to move, sir?
Then he approached mason, whom the surgeon was already handling.
Now, my good fellow, how are you?
She's done for me, i fear, was the faint reply.
Carter, assure him there's no danger.
The flesh on the shoulder is torn as well as cut.
This wound was not done with a knife there have been teeth here!
She bit me, he murmured.
She worried me like a tigress, when rochester got the knife from her.
But under such circumstances, what could one do?
And i did not expect it she looked so quiet at first.
I thought i could have done some good.
The sun will soon rise, and i must have him off.
Directly, sir the shoulder is just bandaged.
She sucked the blood she said she'd drain my heart, said mason.
I wish i could forget it, was the answer.
Impossible to forget this night!
It is not impossible have some energy, man.
Carter has done with you or nearly so i'll make you decent in a trice.
Was anybody stirring below when you went down, jane?
No, sir all was very still.
Here, carter, help him on with his waist coat.
Where did you leave your furred cloak?
You can't travel a mile without that, i know, in this damned cold climate.
Again i ran, and again returned, bearing an immense mantle lined and edged with fur.
What a mercy you are shod with velvet, jane!
A clod hopping messenger would never do at this juncture.
I flew thither and back, bringing the desired vessels.
That will do now wet the lip of the phial.
Drink, richard it will give you the heart you lack, for an hour or so.
But will it hurt me?
Mr. mason obeyed, because it was evidently useless to resist.
Carter, take him under the other shoulder.
Be of good cheer, richard step out that's it!
I do feel better, remarked mr. mason.
I am sure you do.
Richard, how is it with you?
The fresh air revives me, fairfax.
Leave the window open on his side, carter there is no wind good bye, dick.
Fairfax well what is it?
Yet would to god there was an end of all this!
Added mr. rochester, as he closed and barred the heavy yard gates.
He had opened the portal and stood at it, waiting for me.
It seems to me a splendid mansion, sir.
Now here all is real, sweet, and pure.
Jane, will you have a flower?
Do you like this sunrise, jane?
You have passed a strange night, jane.
I was afraid of some one coming out of the inner room.
Will grace poole live here still, sir?
Don't trouble your head about her put the thing out of your thoughts.
Yet it seems to me your life is hardly secure while she stays.
Never fear i will take care of myself.
Is the danger you apprehended last night gone by now, sir?
I cannot vouch for that till mason is out of england nor even then.
But mr. mason seems a man easily led.
He laughed sardonically, hastily took my hand, and as hastily threw it from him.
If i could do that, simpleton, where would the danger be?
Now you look puzzled and i will puzzle you further.
You are my little friend, are you not?
Precisely i see you do.
God grant it may be so!
Here, jane, is an arbour sit down.
Mr. rochester took it, leaving room, however, for me but i stood before him.
Sit, he said the bench is long enough for two.
You don't hesitate to take a place at my side, do you?
I answered him by assuming it to refuse would, i felt, have been unwise.
No, sir i am content.
He paused for an answer and what was i to say?
Oh, for some good spirit to suggest a judicious and satisfactory response!
But the instrument the instrument!
God, who does the work, ordains the instrument.
At last i looked up at the tardy speaker he was looking eagerly at me.
Shake hands in confirmation of the word.
Jane, when will you watch with me again?
Whenever i can be useful, sir.
For instance, the night before i am married!
I am sure i shall not be able to sleep.
Will you promise to sit up with me to bear me company?
She's a rare one, is she not, jane?
There's dent and lynn in the stables!
Go in by the shrubbery, through that wicket.
Chapter xxi presentiments are strange things!
Sympathies, i believe, exist whose workings baffle mortal comprehension.
And signs, for aught we know, may be but the sympathies of nature with man.
The next day bessie was sent for home to the deathbed of her little sister.
You are married to bessie?
And are the family well at the house, robert?
I hope no one is dead, i said, glancing at his black dress.
And how does his mother bear it?
I heard from bessie he was not doing well.
How he died, god knows!
They say he killed himself.
I was silent the things were frightful.
Yes, robert, i shall be ready it seems to me that i ought to go.
I think so too, miss.
Does that person want you?
She inquired of mr. rochester and mr. rochester turned to see who the person was.
He said, as he rested his back against the schoolroom door, which he had shut.
If you please, sir, i want leave of absence for a week or two.
To see a sick lady who has sent for me.
That is a hundred miles off!
Who may she be that sends for people to see her that distance?
Her name is reed, sir mrs. reed.
There was a reed of gateshead, a magistrate.
It is his widow, sir.
And what have you to do with her?
How do you know her?
Mr. reed was my uncle my mother's brother.
You never told me that before you always said you had no relations.
None that would own me, sir.
Mr. reed is dead, and his wife cast me off.
Because i was poor, and burdensome, and she disliked me.
The news so shocked his mother that it brought on an apoplectic attack.
And what good can you do her?
How long will you stay?
As short a time as possible, sir.
I shall certainly return if all be well.
And who goes with you?
You don't travel a hundred miles alone.
No, sir, she has sent her coachman.
A person to be trusted?
Yes, sir, he has lived ten years in the family.
When do you wish to go?
Early to morrow morning, sir.
How much have you in the world, jane?
I drew out my purse a meagre thing it was.
I told him i had no change.
I don't want change you know that.
I declined accepting more than was my due.
He scowled at first then, as if recollecting something, he said right, right!
There are ten is it not plenty?
Yes, sir, but now you owe me five.
Come back for it, then i am your banker for forty pounds.
I am curious to hear it.
There's sense in the suggestion not a doubt of it.
I hope not, sir but i must seek another situation somewhere.
He looked at me some minutes.
You shall walk up the pyramids of egypt!
At your peril you advertise!
I wish i had only offered you a sovereign instead of ten pounds.
Give me back nine pounds, jane i've a use for it.
And so have i, sir, i returned, putting my hands and my purse behind me.
I could not spare the money on any account.
Said he, refusing me a pecuniary request!
Give me five pounds, jane.
Not five shillings, sir nor five pence.
Just let me look at the cash.
No, sir you are not to be trusted.
I'll promise you anything, sir, that i think i am likely to perform.
Not to advertise and to trust this quest of a situation to me.
I'll find you one in time.
I'll pledge my word on it.
You go to morrow, then?
Shall you come down to the drawing room after dinner?
No, sir, i must prepare for the journey.
Then you and i must bid good bye for a little while?
And how do people perform that ceremony of parting, jane?
Teach me i'm not quite up to it.
They say, farewell, or any other form they prefer.
Farewell, mr. rochester, for the present.
The same, if you like, sir.
Farewell, miss eyre, for the present is that all?
It seems stingy, to my notions, and dry, and unfriendly.
I should like something else a little addition to the rite.
If one shook hands, for instance but no that would not content me either.
So you'll do no more than say farewell, jane?
Very likely but it is blank and cool 'farewell.
How long is he going to stand with his back against that door?
I asked myself i want to commence my packing.
I knew you would come!
Exclaimed mrs. leaven, as i entered.
Yes, she is alive and more sensible and collected than she was.
Has she mentioned me lately?
Bessie had retained her quick temper as well as her light foot and good looks.
In another moment i was within that apartment.
The inanimate objects were not changed but the living things had altered past recognition.
Georgiana added to her how d'ye do?
Georgiana almost started, and she opened her blue eyes wild and wide.
Mama dislikes being disturbed in an evening, remarked eliza.
I approached the bed i opened the curtains and leant over the high piled pillows.
Well did i remember mrs. reed's face, and i eagerly sought the familiar image.
How often had it lowered on me menace and hate!
And yet i stooped down and kissed her she looked at me.
How are you, dear aunt?
But unimpressionable natures are not so soon softened, nor are natural antipathies so readily eradicated.
My tears had risen, just as in childhood i ordered them back to their source.
You have seen my daughters?
Said she don't annoy me with holding the clothes fast.
I have had more trouble with that child than any one would believe.
What did they do with her at lowood?
The fever broke out there, and many of the pupils died.
She, however, did not die but i said she did i wish she had died!
A strange wish, mrs. reed why do you hate her so?
Oh, i wish he would cease tormenting me with letters for money?
I have no more money to give him we are getting poor.
I can never submit to do that yet how are we to get on?
Two thirds of my income goes in paying the interest of mortgages.
John gambles dreadfully, and always loses poor boy!
She was getting much excited.
Exclaimed mrs. reed, there is another thing i wished to say.
I am come to a strange pass i have heavy troubles.
How is the money to be had?
Bessie now endeavoured to persuade her to take a sedative draught she succeeded with difficulty.
Soon after, mrs. reed grew more composed, and sank into a dozing state.
More than ten days elapsed before i had again any conversation with her.
Meantime, i got on as well as i could with georgiana and eliza.
They were very cold, indeed, at first.
I took a soft black pencil, gave it a broad point, and worked away.
I looked at it i smiled at the speaking likeness i was absorbed and content.
Is that a portrait of some one you know?
Asked eliza, who had approached me unnoticed.
Of course, i lied it was, in fact, a very faithful representation of mr. rochester.
But what was that to her, or to any one but myself?
Georgiana also advanced to look.
The other drawings pleased her much, but she called that an ugly man.
They both seemed surprised at my skill.
I offered to sketch their portraits and each, in turn, sat for a pencil outline.
Then georgiana produced her album.
She proposed a walk in the grounds.
She passed about five minutes each day in her mother's sick room, and no more.
Eliza still spoke little she had evidently no time to talk.
She had an alarm to call her up early.
She seemed to want no company no conversation.
I asked if georgiana would accompany her.
Georgiana and she had nothing in common they never had had.
She would not be burdened with her society for any consideration.
Georgiana should take her own course and she, eliza, would take hers.
You had no right to be born, for you make no use of life.
You might have spared yourself the trouble of delivering that tirade, answered georgiana.
I knew mrs. reed had not spoken for days was she reviving?
I went up to her.
It is i, aunt reed.
Looking at me with surprise and a sort of alarm, but still not wildly.
You are quite a stranger to me where is bessie?
She is at the lodge, aunt.
I said nothing i was afraid of occasioning some shock by declaring my identity.
Yet, said she, i am afraid it is a mistake my thoughts deceive me.
I am very ill, i know, she said ere long.
Or is there no one in the room but you?
I assured her we were alone.
Well, i have twice done you a wrong which i regret now.
Well, i must get it over.
Eternity is before me i had better tell her.
Read the letter, she said.
I am, madam, c., c., john eyre, madeira.
It was dated three years back.
Why did i never hear of this?
My disposition is not so bad as you think i am passionate, but not vindictive.
I approached my cheek to her lips she would not touch it.
She said i oppressed her by leaning over the bed, and again demanded water.
The nurse now entered, and bessie followed.
I was not present to close her eyes, nor were either of her daughters.
They came to tell us the next morning that all was over.
She was by that time laid out.
A strange and solemn object was that corpse to me.
Eliza surveyed her parent calmly.
Neither of us had dropt a tear.
One morning she told me i was at liberty.
And, she added, i am obliged to you for your valuable services and discreet conduct!
To morrow, she continued, i set out for the continent.
I neither expressed surprise at this resolution nor attempted to dissuade her from it.
However, it is not my business, and so it suits you, i don't much care.
The return to thornfield was yet to be tried.
I was going back to thornfield but how long was i to stay there?
Not long of that i was sure.
You would be strangely incredulous if you did doubt it, was my mental comment.
The question followed, where was i to go?
But what is so headstrong as youth?
What so blind as inexperience?
How full the hedges are of roses!
But i have no time to gather any i want to be at the house.
I know another way to the house.
It does not signify if i knew twenty ways for he has seen me.
He cries and he puts up his book and his pencil.
Come on, if you please.
And this is jane eyre?
Are you coming from millcote, and on foot?
What the deuce have you done with yourself this last month?
I have been with my aunt, sir, who is dead.
Good angels be my guard!
He added, when he had paused an instant.
Absent from me a whole month, and forgetting me quite, i'll be sworn!
And he had spoken of thornfield as my home would that it were my home!
He did not leave the stile, and i hardly liked to ask to go by.
I inquired soon if he had not been to london.
Yes i suppose you found that out by second sight.
Mrs. fairfax told me in a letter.
And did she inform you what i went to do?
I wish, jane, i were a trifle better adapted to match with her externally.
I got over the stile without a word, and meant to leave him calmly.
An impulse held me fast a force turned me round.
Little adele was half wild with delight when she saw me.
Mrs. fairfax received me with her usual plain friendliness.
Leah smiled, and even sophie bid me bon soir with glee.
A fortnight of dubious calm succeeded my return to thornfield hall.
Never had i loved him so well.
I watched her drop asleep, and when i left her, i sought the garden.
Here one could wander unseen.
I look round and i listen.
I see trees laden with ripening fruit.
I make for the wicket leading to the shrubbery, and i see mr. rochester entering.
I shall get by very well, i meditated.
I had made no noise he had not eyes behind could his shadow feel?
I started at first, and then i approached him.
I am attached to it, indeed.
Yes, sir in different ways, i have an affection for both.
And would be sorry to part with them?
He said, and sighed and paused.
Must i move on, sir?
I believe you must, jane.
I am sorry, janet, but i believe indeed you must.
This was a blow but i did not let it prostrate me.
Well, sir, i shall be ready when the order to march comes.
It is come now i must give it to night.
Then you are going to be married, sir?
You're not turning your head to look after more moths, are you?
That was only a lady clock, child, 'flying away home.
Adele must go to school and you, miss eyre, must get a new situation.
Thank you, sir i am sorry to give oh, no need to apologise!
You'll like ireland, i think they're such warm hearted people there, they say.
It is a long way off, sir.
From england and from thornfield and well?
I did not cry so as to be heard, however i avoided sobbing.
It is a long way, i again said.
We have been good friends, jane have we not?
He seated me and himself.
Are you anything akin to me, do you think, jane?
I could risk no sort of answer by this time my heart was still.
As for you, you'd forget me.
That i never should, sir you know impossible to proceed.
Jane, do you hear that nightingale singing in the wood?
Because you are sorry to leave it?
I have not been trampled on.
I have not been petrified.
Where do you see the necessity?
You, sir, have placed it before me.
In the shape of miss ingram a noble and beautiful woman, your bride.
Then i must go you have said it yourself.
I swear it and the oath shall be kept.
I tell you i must go!
I retorted, roused to something like passion.
Do you think i can stay to become nothing to you?
Do you think i am an automaton?
I have as much soul as you, and full as much heart!
Repeated mr. rochester so, he added, enclosing me in his arms.
Gathering me to his breast, pressing his lips on my lips so, jane!
I would scorn such a union therefore i am better than you let me go!
I have spoken my mind, and can go anywhere now.
Another effort set me at liberty, and i stood erect before him.
You play a farce, which i merely laugh at.
For that fate you have already made your choice, and must abide by it.
Jane, be still a few moments you are over excited i will be still too.
Mr. rochester sat quiet, looking at me gently and seriously.
I was silent i thought he mocked me.
Your bride stands between us.
He rose, and with a stride reached me.
Jane, will you marry me?
Do you doubt me, jane?
You have no faith in me?
Am i a liar in your eyes?
Little sceptic, you shall be convinced.
What love have i for miss ingram?
None and that you know.
What love has she for me?
I would not i could not marry miss ingram.
You you strange, you almost unearthly thing!
I love as my own flesh.
You, jane, i must have you for my own entirely my own.
Mr. rochester, let me look at your face turn to the moonlight.
Because i want to read your countenance turn!
You will find it scarcely more legible than a crumpled, scratched page.
Read on only make haste, for i suffer.
Oh, jane, you torture me!
With that searching and yet faithful and generous look, you torture me!
How can i do that?
He ejaculated and added wildly jane accept me quickly.
Say, edward give me my name edward i will marry you.
Do you truly love me?
Do you sincerely wish me to be your wife?
I do and if an oath is necessary to satisfy you, i swear it.
Then, sir, i will marry you.
There is no one to meddle, sir.
I have no kindred to interfere.
No that is the best of it, he said.
Again and again he said, are you happy, jane?
And again and again i answered, yes.
After which he murmured, it will atone it will atone.
Have i not found her friendless, and cold, and comfortless?
Will i not guard, and cherish, and solace her?
Is there not love in my heart, and constancy in my resolves?
It will expiate at god's tribunal.
I know my maker sanctions what i do.
For the world's judgment i wash my hands thereof.
For man's opinion i defy it.
But what had befallen the night?
And what ailed the chestnut tree?
We must go in, said mr. rochester the weather changes.
I could have sat with thee till morning, jane.
And so, thought i, could i with you.
I did not observe her at first, nor did mr. rochester.
The clock was on the stroke of twelve.
I only smiled at her, and ran upstairs.
Explanation will do for another time, thought i.
Nature must be gladsome when i was so happy.
During the meal she was quiet and cool but i could not undeceive her then.
I must wait for my master to give explanations and so must she.
I ate what i could, and then i hastened upstairs.
I met adele leaving the schoolroom.
It is time for lessons.
Mr. rochester has sent me away to the nursery.
Come and bid me good morning, said he.
It seemed natural it seemed genial to be so well loved, so caressed by him.
Jane, you look blooming, and smiling, and pretty, said he truly pretty this morning.
Is this my pale, little elf?
Is this my mustard seed?
It is jane eyre, sir.
Soon to be jane rochester, he added in four weeks, janet not a day more.
I did, and i could not quite comprehend it it made me giddy.
It was, i think almost fear.
You blushed, and now you are white, jane what is that for?
Because you gave me a new name jane rochester and it seems so strange.
Yes, mrs. rochester, said he young mrs. rochester fairfax rochester's girl bride.
It can never be, sir it does not sound likely.
Human beings never enjoy complete happiness in this world.
Which i can and will realise.
I shall begin to day.
I don't like to hear them spoken of.
Jewels for jane eyre sounds unnatural and strange i would rather not have them.
Think of other subjects, and speak of other things, and in another strain.
Don't address me as if i were a beauty i am your plain, quakerish governess.
Puny and insignificant, you mean.
You are dreaming, sir, or you are sneering.
For god's sake don't be ironical!
He pursued his theme, however, without noticing my deprecation.
I told you we shall be married in four weeks.
I laughed at him as he said this.
What do you anticipate of me?
I suppose your love will effervesce in six months, or less.
Yet are you not capricious, sir?
Had you ever experience of such a character, sir?
Did you ever love such an one?
But before me if i, indeed, in any respect come up to your difficult standard?
I never met your likeness.
Why do you smile, jane?
What does that inexplicable, that uncanny turn of countenance mean?
You don't talk very wisely just now any more than those gentlemen acted very wisely.
I might as well 'gild refined gold.
I know it your request is granted then for the time.
I will remand the order i despatched to my banker.
What do i want with half your estate?
Do you think i am a jew usurer, seeking good investment in land?
I would much rather have all your confidence.
You will not exclude me from your confidence if you admit me to your heart?
Don't long for poison don't turn out a downright eve on my hands!
I dare you to any such experiment.
Encroach, presume, and the game is up.
How stern you look now!
That will be your married look, sir, i suppose?
But what had you to ask, thing, out with it?
I had rather be a thing than an angel.
Thank god it is no worse!
Janet, by the bye, it was you who made me the offer.
But to the point if you please, sir miss ingram?
Now you are small not one whit bigger than the end of my little finger.
It was a burning shame and a scandalous disgrace to act in that way.
Did you think nothing of miss ingram's feelings, sir?
Her feelings are concentrated in one pride and that needs humbling.
Never mind, mr. rochester it is in no way interesting to you to know that.
Answer me truly once more.
Do you think miss ingram will not suffer from your dishonest coquetry?
Won't she feel forsaken and deserted?
You have a curious, designing mind, mr. rochester.
I am afraid your principles on some points are eccentric.
I turned my lips to the hand that lay on my shoulder.
I was again ready with my request.
Give her some explanation before i see her again.
It pains me to be misjudged by so good a woman.
Go to your room, and put on your bonnet, he replied.
I believe she thought i had forgotten my station, and yours, sir.
I have surely not been dreaming, have i?
He has said the same thing to me, i replied.
She looked at me bewildered.
I could never have thought it.
He, too, has always been called careful.
He means to marry you?
She continued but no doubt, it is true since you say so.
How it will answer, i cannot tell i really don't know.
He might almost be your father.
Exclaimed i, nettled he is nothing like my father!
No one, who saw us together, would suppose it for an instant.
Is it really for love he is going to marry you?
I said is it impossible that mr. rochester should have a sincere affection for me?
I have always noticed that you were a sort of pet of his.
Well, never mind that now, i interrupted impatiently it is enough that all was right.
Try and keep mr. rochester at a distance distrust yourself as well as him.
Gentlemen in his station are not accustomed to marry their governesses.
I was growing truly irritated happily, adele ran in.
Let me go, let me go to millcote too!
Mr. rochester won't though there is so much room in the new carriage.
Beg him to let me go mademoiselle.
Adele may accompany us, may she not, sir?
Do let her go, mr. rochester, if you please it would be better.
Not it she will be a restraint.
He was quite peremptory, both in look and voice.
I half lost the sense of power over him.
He asked all the sunshine is gone.
Do you really wish the bairn to go?
Will it annoy you if she is left behind?
I would far rather she went, sir.
Then off for your bonnet, and back like a flash of lightning!
She obeyed him with what speed she might.
He handed her over as if she had been a lapdog.
I'll send her to school yet, he said, but now he was smiling.
Adele heard him, and asked if she was to go to school sans mademoiselle?
She will have nothing to eat you will starve her, observed adele.
She will want to warm herself what will she do for a fire?
Oh, qu' elle y sera mal peu comfortable!
And her clothes, they will wear out how can she get new ones?
Mr. rochester professed to be puzzled.
What would you do, adele?
Cudgel your brains for an expedient.
How would a white or a pink cloud answer for a gown, do you think?
And one could cut a pretty enough scarf out of a rainbow.
If i were mademoiselle, i would never consent to go with you.
She has consented she has pledged her word.
Adele, look at that field.
It was a little thing with a veil of gossamer on its head.
I beckoned it to come near me it stood soon at my knee.
Oh,' returned the fairy, 'that does not signify!
She nodded again at the moon.
But what has mademoiselle to do with it?
Mademoiselle is a fairy, he said, whispering mysteriously.
The hour spent at millcote was a somewhat harassing one to me.
He chuckled he rubbed his hands.
Oh, it is rich to see and hear her?
The eastern allusion bit me again.
I would consent to be at your mercy, jane.
Why, jane, what would you have?
You will stipulate, i see, for peculiar terms what will they be?
I only want an easy mind, sir not crushed by crowded obligations.
Do you remember what you said of celine varens?
Of the diamonds, the cashmeres you gave her?
I will not be your english celine varens.
Your regard and if i give you mine in return, that debt will be quit.
Well, for cool native impudence and pure innate pride, you haven't your equal, said he.
We were now approaching thornfield.
Will it please you to dine with me to day?
He asked, as we re entered the gates.
And what for, 'no, thank you?
You delight in half phrases.
Till i can't help it.
You will give up your governessing slavery at once.
Indeed, begging your pardon, sir, i shall not.
I shall just go on with it as usual.
He duly summoned me to his presence in the evening.
I remembered his fine voice i knew he liked to sing good singers generally do.
Did i like his voice?
Then, jane, you must play the accompaniment.
Very well, sir, i will try.
I did try, but was presently swept off the stool and denominated a little bungler.
I hied me to the window recess.
As i love loved am i!
I quailed momentarily then i rallied.
That was a strange question to be put by his darling jane.
What did he mean by such a pagan idea?
I had no intention of dying with him he might depend on that.
Oh, all he longed, all he prayed for, was that i might live with him!
Death was not for such as i.
No i would rather be excused.
Would i be quiet and talk rationally?
He fretted, pished, and pshawed.
I laughed in my sleeve at his menaces.
Chapter xxv the month of courtship had wasted its very last hours were being numbered.
I will leave you by yourself, white dream, i said.
I had at heart a strange and anxious thought.
He may be coming now, and to meet him will save some minutes of suspense.
I wish he would come!
I exclaimed, seized with hypochondriac foreboding.
I had expected his arrival before tea now it was dark what could keep him?
The event of last night again recurred to me.
I interpreted it as a warning of disaster.
It was he here he was, mounted on mesrour, followed by pilot.
I now ran to meet him.
Step on my boot toe give me both hands mount!
I obeyed joy made me agile i sprang up before him.
No, but i thought you would never come.
I ask again, is there anything the matter?
Nothing now i am neither afraid nor unhappy.
Then you have been both?
You wandered out of the fold to seek your shepherd, did you, jane?
I wanted you but don't boast.
Here we are at thornfield now let me get down.
He landed me on the pavement.
I found him at supper.
I sat down near him, but told him i could not eat.
Is it because you have the prospect of a journey before you, jane?
Is it the thoughts of going to london that takes away your appetite?
Everything in life seems unreal.
Except me i am substantial enough touch me.
You, sir, are the most phantom like of all you are a mere dream.
He held out his hand, laughing.
Said he, placing it close to my eyes.
He had a rounded, muscular, and vigorous hand, as well as a long, strong arm.
Sir, have you finished supper?
I rang the bell and ordered away the tray.
It is near midnight, i said.
Yes but remember, jane, you promised to wake with me the night before my wedding.
Are all your arrangements complete?
With what an extraordinary smile you uttered that word 'very well,' jane!
What a bright spot of colour you have on each cheek!
And how strangely your eyes glitter!
Tell me what you feel.
I could not, sir no words could tell you what i feel.
You have been over excited, or over fatigued.
Do you, sir, feel calm and happy?
No but happy to the heart's core.
That i shall not prove a good husband?
It is the idea farthest from my thoughts.
Are you apprehensive of the new sphere you are about to enter?
Of the new life into which you are passing?
You puzzle me, jane your look and tone of sorrowful audacity perplex and pain me.
You were from home last night?
Mrs. fairfax has said something, perhaps?
Or you have overheard the servants talk?
Your sensitive self respect has been wounded?
No, sir, don't caress me now let me talk undisturbed.
How well you read me, you witch!
Interposed mr. rochester but what did you find in the veil besides its embroidery?
Did you find poison, or a dagger, that you look so mournful now?
I wished you were at home.
I was glad when it ceased.
On sleeping, i continued in dreams the idea of a dark and gusty night.
And these dreams weigh on your spirits now, jane, when i am close to you?
Forget visionary woe, and think only of real happiness!
Those words did not die inarticulate on your lips.
Do you love me, jane?
I do, sir i do, with my whole heart.
I thought, jane, you had told me all.
I thought i had found the source of your melancholy in a dream.
But i will not believe it to be anything important.
I warn you of incredulity beforehand.
I saw you like a speck on a white track, lessening every moment.
The blast blew so strong i could not stand.
Now, jane, that is all.
All the preface, sir the tale is yet to come.
On waking, a gleam dazzled my eyes i thought oh, it is daylight!
But i was mistaken it was only candlelight.
Sophie, i supposed, had come in.
I asked, 'sophie, what are you doing?
I again cried and still it was silent.
It must have been one of them, interrupted my master.
No, sir, i solemnly assure you to the contrary.
Did you see her face?
Fearful and ghastly to me oh, sir, i never saw a face like it!
It was a discoloured face it was a savage face.
Ghosts are usually pale, jane.
Shall i tell you of what it reminded me?
Of the foul german spectre the vampyre.
Who was with you when you revived?
No one, sir, but the broad day.
Now, sir, tell me who and what that woman was?
The creature of an over stimulated brain that is certain.
And your previous dreams, were they real too?
Is thornfield hall a ruin?
Am i severed from you by insuperable obstacles?
Am i leaving you without a tear without a kiss without a word?
Am i about to do it?
And since i cannot do it, jane, it must have been unreal.
I felt mr. rochester start and shudder he hastily flung his arms round me.
Oh, to think what might have happened!
It was half dream, half reality.
Do you accept my solution of the mystery?
And now, as it was long past one, i prepared to leave him.
Does not sophie sleep with adele in the nursery?
He asked, as i lit my candle.
And there is room enough in adele's little bed for you.
I shall be very glad to do so, sir.
And fasten the door securely on the inside.
And now, no more sombre thoughts chase dull care away, janet.
Don't you hear to what soft whispers the wind has fallen?
Well, said mr. rochester, gazing inquiringly into my eyes, how is my janet now?
The night is serene, sir and so am i.
Look at yourself in the mirror you have not taken one peep.
Called a voice, and i hastened down.
I was received at the foot of the stairs by mr. rochester.
He said, my brain is on fire with impatience, and you tarry so long!
One of his lately hired servants, a footman, answered it.
Is john getting the carriage ready?
Is the luggage brought down?
They are bringing it down, sir.
Mr. wood is in the vestry, sir, putting on his surplice.
I wanted to feel the thoughts whose force he seemed breasting and resisting.
At the churchyard wicket he stopped he discovered i was quite out of breath.
Am i cruel in my love?
Delay an instant lean on me, jane.
All was still two shadows only moved in a remote corner.
Our place was taken at the communion rails.
He paused, as the custom is.
When is the pause after that sentence ever broken by reply?
Not, perhaps, once in a hundred years.
Profound silence fell when he had uttered that word, with deep but low intonation.
The ceremony is quite broken off, subjoined the voice behind us.
What a hot and strong grasp he had!
And how like quarried marble was his pale, firm, massive front at this moment!
How his eye shone, still watchful, and yet wild beneath!
Mr. wood seemed at a loss.
What is the nature of the impediment?
Perhaps it may be got over explained away?
I have called it insuperable, and i speak advisedly.
The speaker came forward and leaned on the rails.
Mr. rochester has a wife now living.
I looked at mr. rochester i made him look at me.
His whole face was colourless rock his eye was both spark and flint.
He disavowed nothing he seemed as if he would defy all things.
He asked of the intruder.
My name is briggs, a solicitor of street, london.
And you would thrust on me a wife?
She was living three months ago, returned the lawyer.
I have a witness to the fact, whose testimony even you, sir, will scarcely controvert.
Produce him or go to hell.
I will produce him first he is on the spot.
Mr. mason, have the goodness to step forward.
Mr. rochester turned and glared at him.
An inaudible reply escaped mason's white lips.
The devil is in it if you cannot answer distinctly.
I again demand, what have you to say?
Sir sir, interrupted the clergyman, do not forget you are in a sacred place.
Courage, urged the lawyer, speak out.
I saw a grim smile contort mr. rochester's lips, and he muttered no, by god!
I took care that none should hear of it or of her under that name.
All shall bolt out at once, like the bullet from the barrel.
Mr. rochester continued, hardily and recklessly bigamy is an ugly word!
I'd almost as soon strike a woman as you.
Her mother, the creole, was both a madwoman and a drunkard!
Bertha, like a dutiful child, copied her parent in both points.
I went through rich scenes!
My experience has been heavenly, if you only knew it!
But i owe you no further explanation.
Come all of you follow!
Still holding me fast, he left the church the three gentlemen came after.
At the front door of the hall we found the carriage.
At our entrance, mrs. fairfax, adele, sophie, leah, advanced to meet and greet us.
To the right about every soul!
Cried the master away with your congratulations!
They are fifteen years too late!
You know this place, mason, said our guide she bit and stabbed you here.
He lifted the hangings from the wall, uncovering the second door this, too, he opened.
Grace poole bent over the fire, apparently cooking something in a saucepan.
And how is your charge to day?
Exclaimed grace you'd better not stay.
Only a few moments, grace you must allow me a few moments.
For god's sake, take care!
I recognised well that purple face, those bloated features.
We had better leave her, whispered mason.
Was his brother in law's recommendation.
The three gentlemen retreated simultaneously.
The operation was performed amidst the fiercest yells and the most convulsive plunges.
That is my wife , said he.
Wood and briggs, look at the difference!
I must shut up my prize.
Mr. rochester stayed a moment behind us, to give some further order to grace poole.
The solicitor addressed me as he descended the stair.
Mr. eyre has been the funchal correspondent of his house for some years.
Mr. mason, astonished and distressed as you may suppose, revealed the real state of matters.
He referred him to me for assistance.
Have we anything else to stay for?
He inquired of mr. mason.
I then sat down i felt weak and tired.
I leaned my arms on a table, and my head dropped on them.
And yet where was the jane eyre of yesterday?
Oh, never more could it turn to him for faith was blighted confidence destroyed!
Oh, how blind had been my eyes!
I lay faint, longing to be dead.
I said i could not bear such words now.
Let me be torn away, then i cried.
My head swam as i stood erect.
I could not soon recover myself.
I fell, but not on to the ground an outstretched arm caught me.
You come out at last, he said.
You shut yourself up and grieve alone!
I would rather you had come and upbraided me with vehemence.
I expected a scene of some kind.
But i err you have not wept at all!
I suppose, then, your heart has been weeping blood?
Not a word of reproach?
Nothing to cut a feeling or sting a passion?
Jane, i never meant to wound you thus.
Will you ever forgive me?
Reader, i forgave him at the moment and on the spot.
You know i am a scoundrel, jane?
Then tell me so roundly and sharply don't spare me.
I cannot i am tired and sick.
I was in the library sitting in his chair he was quite near.
I must leave him, it appears.
I do not want to leave him i cannot leave him.
How are you now, jane?
Much better, sir i shall be well soon.
Taste the wine again, jane.
I turned my face away and put his aside.
You won't kiss the husband of bertha mason?
You consider my arms filled and my embraces appropriated?
At any rate, there is neither room nor claim for me, sir.
What do you say to that?
I know you i am on my guard.
It is cruel she cannot help being mad.
If you were mad, do you think i should hate you?
But why do i follow that train of ideas?
I was talking of removing you from thornfield.
All, you know, is prepared for prompt departure to morrow you shall go.
And take adele with you, sir, i interrupted she will be a companion for you.
What do you mean, jane?
Why do you importune me about her!
I say, why do you assign adele to me for a companion?
I see i must come to an explanation.
I don't know what sphynx like expression is forming in your countenance.
You are to share my solitude.
Now for vexation, and exasperation, and endless trouble!
I long to exert a fraction of samson's strength, and break the entanglement like tow!
He recommenced his walk, but soon again stopped, and this time just before me.
Because, if you won't, i'll try violence.
But i was not afraid not in the least.
I felt an inward power a sense of influence, which supported me.
He sat down but he did not get leave to speak directly.
If the flood annoyed him, so much the better.
So i gave way and cried heartily.
Soon i heard him earnestly entreating me to be composed.
I said i could not while he was in such a passion.
Hush, now, and wipe your eyes.
His softened voice announced that he was subdued so i, in my turn, became calm.
Then he would draw me to him no.
It was only my station, and the rank of my wife, that you valued?
These words cut me yet what could i do or i say?
If i storm, you have the art of weeping.
Mr. rochester, i must leave you.
I must leave adele and thornfield.
Of course i told you you should.
I pass over the madness about parting from me.
You mean you must become a part of me.
You shall be mrs. rochester both virtually and nominally.
I shall keep only to you so long as you and i live.
There you shall live a happy, and guarded, and most innocent life.
Never fear that i wish to lure you into error to make you my mistress.
Why did you shake your head?
Jane, you must be reasonable, or in truth i shall again become frantic.
Sir, your wife is living that is a fact acknowledged this morning by yourself.
Burst involuntarily from my lips.
I keep telling her i am not married, and do not explain to her why.
Can you listen to me?
Yes, sir for hours if you will.
I remember mrs. fairfax told me so once.
And did you ever hear that my father was an avaricious, grasping man?
I have understood something to that effect.
I must be provided for by a wealthy marriage.
He sought me a partner betimes.
Mr. mason, a west india planter and merchant, was his old acquaintance.
He was certain his possessions were real and vast he made inquiries.
They showed her to me in parties, splendidly dressed.
I seldom saw her alone, and had very little private conversation with her.
She flattered me, and lavishly displayed for my pleasure her charms and accomplishments.
All the men in her circle seemed to admire her and envy me.
Oh, i have no respect for myself when i think of that act!
An agony of inward contempt masters me.
I never loved, i never esteemed, i did not even know her.
With less sin i might have but let me remember to whom i am speaking.
My bride's mother i had never seen i understood she was dead.
There was a younger brother, too a complete dumb idiot.
What a pigmy intellect she had, and what giant propensities!
How fearful were the curses those propensities entailed on me!
No, sir, finish it now i pity you i do earnestly pity you.
Now, sir, proceed what did you do when you found she was mad?
Thus, at the age of twenty six, i was hopeless.
Being unable to sleep in bed, i got up and opened the window.
The air was like sulphur steams i could find no refreshment anywhere.
I have a right to deliver myself from it if i can.
I then framed and fixed a resolution.
I saw hope revive and felt regeneration possible.
Place her in safety and comfort shelter her degradation with secrecy, and leave her.
I acted precisely on this suggestion.
At last i hired grace poole from the grimbsy retreat.
What did i do, jane?
I transformed myself into a will o' the wisp.
I pursued wanderings as wild as those of the march spirit.
I sought the continent, and went devious through all its lands.
I had determined and was convinced that i could and ought.
It was not my original intention to deceive, as i have deceived you.
When you are inquisitive, jane, you always make me smile.
But before i go on, tell me what you mean by your 'well, sir?
What came of such an event?
And what do you wish to know now?
I could not find her.
You are not to suppose that i desired perfection, either of mind or person.
I tried dissipation never debauchery that i hated, and hate.
Yet i could not live alone so i tried the companionship of mistresses.
You already know what she was, and how my liaison with her terminated.
She had two successors an italian, giacinta, and a german, clara both considered singularly handsome.
What was their beauty to me in a few weeks?
Giacinta was unprincipled and violent i tired of her in three months.
You think me an unfeeling, loose principled rake don't you?
I don't like you so well as i have done sometimes, indeed, sir.
You talk of it as a mere matter of course.
It was with me and i did not like it.
It was a grovelling fashion of existence i should never like to return to it.
I now hate the recollection of the time i passed with celine, giacinta, and clara.
I did not give utterance to this conviction it was enough to feel it.
Now, jane, why don't you say 'well, sir?
You disapprove of me still, i see.
But let me come to the point.
On a frosty winter afternoon, i rode in sight of thornfield hall.
I expected no peace no pleasure there.
On a stile in hay lane i saw a quiet little figure sitting by itself.
I must be aided, and by that hand and aided i was.
It was a snowy day, i recollect, and you could not go out of doors.
I was in my room the door was ajar i could both listen and watch.
I was vexed with you for getting out of my sight.
Impatiently i waited for evening, when i might summon you to my presence.
I made you talk ere long i found you full of strange contrasts.
Yet, for a long time, i treated you distantly, and sought your company rarely.
I resumed my notice of you.
I shuddered to hear the infatuated assertion.
You see now how the case stands do you not?
You are my sympathy my better self my good angel.
I am bound to you with a strong attachment.
It was because i felt and knew this, that i resolved to marry you.
I feared early instilled prejudice i wanted to have you safe before hazarding confidences.
Jane give it me now.
Why are you silent, jane?
I was experiencing an ordeal a hand of fiery iron grasped my vitals.
Terrible moment full of struggle, blackness, burning!
One drear word comprised my intolerable duty depart!
Jane, you understand what i want of you?
Just this promise 'i will be yours, mr.
Mr. rochester, i will not be yours.
Jane , do you mean it now?
Softly kissing my forehead and cheek.
I do, extricating myself from restraint rapidly and completely.
Oh, jane, this is bitter!
It would not be wicked to love me.
It would to obey you.
A wild look raised his brows crossed his features he rose but he forebore yet.
Give one glance to my horrible life when you are gone.
All happiness will be torn away with you.
What shall i do, jane?
Where turn for a companion and for some hope?
Do as i do trust in god and yourself.
Hope to meet again there.
Then you will not yield?
Then you condemn me to live wretched and to die accursed?
I advise you to live sinless, and i wish you to die tranquil.
Then you snatch love and innocence from me?
You fling me back on lust for a passion vice for an occupation?
We were born to strive and endure you as well as i do so.
You will forget me before i forget you.
You make me a liar by such language you sully my honour.
They spoke almost as loud as feeling and that clamoured wildly.
Who in the world cares for you ?
Or who will be injured by what you do?
Still indomitable was the reply i care for myself.
I will keep the law given by god sanctioned by man.
If at my individual convenience i might break them, what would be their worth?
Mr. rochester, reading my countenance, saw i had done so.
A mere reed she feels in my hand!
Whatever i do with its cage, i cannot get at it the savage, beautiful creature!
As he said this, he released me from his clutch, and only looked at me.
You will not be my comforter, my rescuer?
My deep love, my wild woe, my frantic prayer, are all nothing to you?
What unutterable pathos was in his voice!
How hard it was to reiterate firmly, i am going.
Withdraw, then, i consent but remember, you leave me here in anguish.
He turned away he threw himself on his face on the sofa.
My hope my love my life!
Broke in anguish from his lips.
Then came a deep, strong sob.
God bless you, my dear master!
But jane will give me her love yes nobly, generously.
Was the cry of my heart as i left him.
Despair added, farewell for ever!
It gazed and gazed on me.
So i answered after i had waked from the trance like dream.
It was yet night, but july nights are short soon after midnight, dawn comes.
I knew where to find in my drawers some linen, a locket, a ring.
I whispered, as i glided past her door.
I said, as i glanced towards the nursery.
No thought could be admitted of entering to embrace her.
That kind master, who could not sleep now, was waiting with impatience for day.
He would send for me in the morning i should be gone.
He would have me sought for vainly.
He would feel himself forsaken his love rejected he would suffer perhaps grow desperate.
I thought of this too.
My hand moved towards the lock i caught it back, and glided on.
All this i did without one sound.
I opened the door, passed out, shut it softly.
Dim dawn glimmered in the yard.
Through that i departed it, too, i shut and now i was out of thornfield.
Not one thought was to be given either to the past or the future.
I skirted fields, and hedges, and lanes till after sunrise.
But i looked neither to rising sun, nor smiling sky, nor wakening nature.
With agony i thought of what i left.
I could not help it.
As yet my flight, i was sure, was undiscovered.
I had no solace from self approbation none even from self respect.
I had injured wounded left my master.
I was hateful in my own eyes.
Still i could not turn, nor retrace one step.
God must have led me on.
I stood up and lifted my hand it stopped.
Gentle reader, may you never feel what i then felt!
May your eyes never shed such stormy, scalding, heart wrung tears as poured from mine.
Chapter xxviii two days are passed.
The coach is a mile off by this time i am alone.
What was i to do?
Oh, intolerable questions, when i could do nothing and go nowhere!
The dew fell, but with propitious softness no breeze whispered.
My hunger, sharp before, was, if not satisfied, appeased by this hermit's meal.
I said my evening prayers at its conclusion, and then chose my couch.
Thus lodged, i was not, at least at the commencement of the night, cold.
My rest might have been blissful enough, only a sad heart broke it.
It plained of its gaping wounds, its inward bleeding, its riven chords.
Worn out with this torture of thought, i rose to my knees.
I had risen to my knees to pray for mr. rochester.
Looking up, i, with tear dimmed eyes, saw the mighty milky way.
Mr. rochester was safe he was god's, and by god would he be guarded.
But next day, want came to me pale and bare.
What a still, hot, perfect day!
What a golden desert this spreading moor!
I wished i could live in it and on it.
I rose i looked back at the bed i had left.
Life, however, was yet in my possession, with all its requirements, and pains, and responsibilities.
The burden must be carried the want provided for the suffering endured the responsibility fulfilled.
Whitcross regained, i followed a road which led from the sun, now fervent and high.
By no other circumstance had i will to decide my choice.
Human life and human labour were near.
I must struggle on strive to live and bend to toil like the rest.
I coveted a cake of bread.
Had i nothing about me i could offer in exchange for one of these rolls?
I had a small silk handkerchief tied round my throat i had my gloves.
I could hardly tell how men and women in extremities of destitution proceeded.
I entered the shop a woman was there.
Seeing a respectably dressed person, a lady as she supposed, she came forward with civility.
How could she serve me?
I was seized with shame my tongue would not utter the request i had prepared.
I only begged permission to sit down a moment, as i was tired.
Disappointed in the expectation of a customer, she coolly acceded to my request.
She pointed to a seat i sank into it.
Soon i asked her if there were any dressmaker or plain workwoman in the village?
Quite as many as there was employment for.
I was driven to the point now.
I was brought face to face with necessity.
Did she know of any place in the neighbourhood where a servant was wanted?
What was the chief trade in this place?
What did most of the people do?
Did mr. oliver employ women?
Nay it was men's work.
And what do the women do?
I knawn't, was the answer.
Some does one thing, and some another.
Poor folk mun get on as they can.
A neighbour or two came in my chair was evidently wanted.
What business had i to approach the white door or touch the glittering knocker?
Yet i drew near and knocked.
A mild looking, cleanly attired young woman opened the door.
No, said she we do not keep a servant.
Can you tell me where i could get employment of any kind?
I am a stranger, without acquaintance in this place.
I want some work no matter what.
Meantime, the afternoon advanced, while i thus wandered about like a lost and starving dog.
In crossing a field, i saw the church spire before me i hastened towards it.
I seemed to have something like a right to seek counsel here.
Renewing then my courage, and gathering my feeble remains of strength, i pushed on.
I reached the house, and knocked at the kitchen door.
An old woman opened i asked was this the parsonage?
Would he be in soon?
No, he was gone from home.
Not so far happen three mile.
Was there any lady of the house?
Oh, for but a crust!
For but one mouthful to allay the pang of famine!
She looked at me with evident suspicion nay, she never sold stuff i' that way.
Almost desperate, i asked for half a cake she again refused.
How could she tell where i had got the handkerchief?
Would she take my gloves?
What could she do with them?
I blamed none of those who repulsed me.
I am sick of the subject.
I stopped and said will you give me a piece of bread?
For i am very hungry.
Towards morning it rained the whole of the following day was wet.
Will you give me that?
She exclaimed, there is a woman wants me to give her these porridge.
Well lass, replied a voice within, give it her if she's a beggar.
T' pig doesn't want it.
The girl emptied the stiffened mould into my hand, and i devoured it ravenously.
My strength is quite failing me, i said in a soliloquy.
I feel i cannot go much farther.
Shall i be an outcast again this night?
While the rain descends so, must i lay my head on the cold, drenched ground?
I fear i cannot do otherwise for who will receive me?
In all likelihood, though, i should die before morning.
And why cannot i reconcile myself to the prospect of death?
Why do i struggle to retain a valueless life?
Sustain me a little longer!
My glazed eye wandered over the dim and misty landscape.
I saw i had strayed far from the village it was quite out of sight.
The very cultivation surrounding it had disappeared.
To the hill, then, i turned.
But all the surface of the waste looked level.
It burnt on, however, quite steadily, neither receding nor advancing.
Is it, then, a bonfire just kindled?
I should but knock at the door to have it shut in my face.
And i sank down where i stood, and hid my face against the ground.
The light was yet there, shining dim but constant through the rain.
I tried to walk again i dragged my exhausted limbs slowly towards it.
Here i fell twice but as often i rose and rallied my faculties.
This light was my forlorn hope i must gain it.
Having crossed the marsh, i saw a trace of white over the moor.
My star vanished as i drew near some obstacle had intervened between me and it.
On each side stood a sable bush holly or yew.
Were the inmates retired to rest?
I feared it must be so.
I could see a clock, a white deal table, some chairs.
I noticed these objects cursorily only in them there was nothing extraordinary.
A strange place was this humble kitchen for such occupants!
Whether it were greek or german i could not tell.
That is strong, she said, when she had finished i relish it.
She exclaimed, while her dark and deep eye sparkled.
There you have a dim and mighty archangel fitly set before you!
The line is worth a hundred pages of fustian.
Is there ony country where they talk i' that way?
Asked the old woman, looking up from her knitting.
Yes, hannah a far larger country than england, where they talk in no other way.
We don't speak german, and we cannot read it without a dictionary to help us.
And what good does it do you?
Varry like but give ower studying ye've done enough for to night.
I think we have at least i'm tired.
It is, especially such a language as this crabbed but glorious deutsch.
I wonder when st. john will come home.
Surely he will not be long now it is just ten .
She wiped her eyes with her apron the two girls, grave before, looked sad now.
But he is in a better place, continued hannah we shouldn't wish him here again.
And then, nobody need to have a quieter death nor he had.
You say he never mentioned us?
Inquired one of the ladies.
He hadn't time, bairn he was gone in a minute, was your father.
She wor the pictur' o' ye, mary diana is more like your father.
Both were fair complexioned and slenderly made both possessed faces full of distinction and intelligence.
And she proceeded to prepare the meal.
The ladies rose they seemed about to withdraw to the parlour.
More desolate, more desperate than ever, it seemed from contrast.
May i speak to your mistresses?
You had better tell me what you have to say to them.
What is your business here at this hour?
Distrust, the very feeling i dreaded, appeared in hannah's face.
Do let me speak to your mistresses.
What can they do for you?
You should not be roving about now it looks very ill.
But where shall i go if you drive me away?
Oh, i'll warrant you know where to go and what to do.
Mind you don't do wrong, that's all.
Don't shut the door oh, don't, for god's sake!
I must the rain is driving in tell the young ladies.
Let me see them indeed, i will not.
You are not what you ought to be, or you wouldn't make such a noise.
But i must die if i am turned away.
Here the honest but inflexible servant clapped the door to and bolted it within.
A pang of exquisite suffering a throe of true despair rent and heaved my heart.
Worn out, indeed, i was not another step could i stir.
Oh, this spectre of death!
Oh, this last hour, approaching in such horror!
Alas, this isolation this banishment from my kind!
I can but die, i said, and i believe in god.
Let me try to wait his will in silence.
With a loud long knock, the new comer appealed to the door.
Is it you, mr. st. john?
Well, how wet and cold you must be, such a wild night as it is!
There has been a beggar woman i declare she is not gone yet!
I have a word to say to the woman.
You have done your duty in excluding, now let me do mine in admitting her.
I was near, and listened to both you and her.
I think this is a peculiar case i must at least examine into it.
Young woman, rise, and pass before me into the house.
With difficulty i obeyed him.
St. john, who is it?
I cannot tell i found her at the door, was the reply.
She does look white, said hannah.
As white as clay or death, was responded.
She will fall let her sit.
And indeed my head swam i dropped, but a chair received me.
I still possessed my senses, though just now i could not speak.
Perhaps a little water would restore her.
But she is worn to nothing.
How very thin, and how very bloodless!
Is she ill, or only famished?
Give it me, and a piece of bread.
Diana broke some bread, dipped it in milk, and put it to my lips.
In her simple words, too, the same balm like emotion spoke try to eat.
I tasted what they offered me feebly at first, eagerly soon.
Not too much at first restrain her, said the brother she has had enough.
And he withdrew the cup of milk and the plate of bread.
A little more, st. john look at the avidity in her eyes.
No more at present, sister.
Try if she can speak now ask her her name.
I felt i could speak, and i answered my name is jane elliott.
Anxious as ever to avoid discovery, i had before resolved to assume an alias .
And where do you live?
Can we send for any one you know?
What account can you give of yourself?
I dared to put off the mendicant to resume my natural manner and character.
But what, then, said he, do you expect me to do for you?
My strength sufficed for but short answers.
And that we may dismiss you to the moor and the rainy night?
She had, i thought, a remarkable countenance, instinct both with power and goodness.
Answering her compassionate gaze with a smile, i said i will trust you.
All three surveyed me, and all three were silent.
Mary and diana, let us go into the parlour and talk the matter over.
Very soon one of the ladies returned i could not tell which.
In an undertone she gave some directions to hannah.
I thanked god experienced amidst unutterable exhaustion a glow of grateful joy and slept.
I knew i was in a small room and in a narrow bed.
Hannah, the servant, was my most frequent visitor.
Diana and mary appeared in the chamber once or twice a day.
I wonder what she has gone through?
Strange hardships, i imagine poor, emaciated, pallid wanderer?
He imagined my recovery would be rapid enough when once commenced.
To speak truth, st. john, my heart rather warms to the poor little soul.
I wish we may be able to benefit her permanently.
That is hardly likely, was the reply.
She is so ill, st. john.
Ill or well, she would always be plain.
The grace and harmony of beauty are quite wanting in those features.
I wished to rise but what could i put on?
I felt ashamed to appear before my benefactors so clad.
I was spared the humiliation.
On a chair by the bedside were all my own things, clean and dry.
My black silk frock hung against the wall.
My very shoes and stockings were purified and rendered presentable.
After a weary process, and resting every five minutes, i succeeded in dressing myself.
What, you have got up!
You may sit you down in my chair on the hearthstone, if you will.
She pointed to the rocking chair i took it.
She bustled about, examining me every now and then with the corner of her eye.
I am no beggar any more than yourself or your young ladies.
But you've never been to a boarding school?
I was at a boarding school eight years.
She opened her eyes wide.
Whatever cannot ye keep yourself for, then?
I have kept myself and, i trust, shall keep myself again.
What are you going to do with these gooseberries?
I inquired, as she brought out a basket of the fruit.
Give them to me and i'll pick them.
Nay i dunnut want ye to do nought.
But i must do something.
Ye've not been used to sarvant's wark, i see by your hands, she remarked.
Happen ye've been a dressmaker?
Some calls it marsh end, and some calls it moor house.
And the gentleman who lives here is called mr. st. john?
Nay he doesn't live here he is only staying a while.
When he is at home, he is in his own parish at morton.
That village a few miles off?
This, then, was his father's residence?
The name, then, of that gentleman, is mr. st. john rivers?
Aye st. john is like his kirstened name.
And his sisters are called diana and mary rivers?
Dead three weeks sin' of a stroke.
The mistress has been dead this mony a year.
Have you lived with the family long?
I've lived here thirty year.
I nursed them all three.
That proves you must have been an honest and faithful servant.
She again regarded me with a surprised stare.
Well, it was hard but what can a body do?
I thought more o' th' childer nor of mysel poor things!
They've like nobody to tak' care on 'em but me.
I'm like to look sharpish.
I maintained a grave silence for some minutes.
You munnut think too hardly of me, she again remarked.
You look a raight down dacent little crater.
That will do i forgive you now.
Hannah was evidently fond of talking.
She did not know where there was such a family for being united.
They returned within the time hannah had allotted them they entered by the kitchen door.
You should have waited for my leave to descend, she said.
You still look very pale and so thin!
Diana had a voice toned, to my ear, like the cooing of a dove.
She possessed eyes whose gaze i delighted to encounter.
Her whole face seemed to me full of charm.
Diana looked and spoke with a certain authority she had a will, evidently.
And what business have you here?
It is not your place.
I am very well here.
Not at all, with hannah bustling about and covering you with flour.
Besides, the fire is too hot for you, interposed mary.
To be sure, added her sister.
Come, you must be obedient.
I examined first, the parlour, and then its occupant.
Had he been a statue instead of a man, he could not have been easier.
This is a gentle delineation, is it not, reader?
Eat that now, she said you must be hungry.
Hannah says you have had nothing but some gruel since breakfast.
I did not refuse it, for my appetite was awakened and keen.
You are very hungry, he said.
Now you may eat, though still not immoderately.
I speak particularly of the young ladies.
Do you mean to say, he asked, that you are completely isolated from every connection?
A most singular position at your age!
I wondered what he sought there his words soon explained the quest.
You have never been married?
Why, she can't be above seventeen or eighteen years old, st. john, said she.
I am near nineteen but i am not married.
They all saw the embarrassment and the emotion.
Where did you last reside?
And you need help, do you not?
I had now swallowed my tea.
I am an orphan, the daughter of a clergyman.
My parents died before i could know them.
I was brought up a dependant educated in a charitable institution.
Robert brocklehurst is the treasurer.
I have heard of mr. brocklehurst, and i have seen the school.
I left lowood nearly a year since to become a private governess.
I obtained a good situation, and was happy.
This place i was obliged to leave four days before i came here.
To this neighbourhood, then, i came, quite destitute.
Come to the sofa and sit down now, miss elliott.
Mr. rivers, whom nothing seemed to escape, noticed it at once.
You said your name was jane elliott?
Your real name you will not give?
You are quite right, i am sure, said diana.
Now do, brother, let her be at peace a while.
I do i have already said so.
Indeed you shall stay here, said diana, putting her white hand on my head.
Right, said mr. st. john, quite coolly.
He now resumed the book with which he had been occupied before tea.
They loved their sequestered home.
I could comprehend the feeling, and share both its strength and truth.
I saw the fascination of the locality.
Indoors we agreed equally well.
Thought fitted thought opinion met opinion we coincided, in short, perfectly.
If in our trio there was a superior and a leader, it was diana.
Physically, she far excelled me she was handsome she was vigorous.
Diana offered to teach me german.
Our natures dovetailed mutual affection of the strongest kind was the result.
They discovered i could draw their pencils and colour boxes were immediately at my service.
My skill, greater in this one point than theirs, surprised and charmed them.
Thus occupied, and mutually entertained, days passed like hours, and weeks like days.
Sometimes, when the day was very unfavourable, his sisters would expostulate.
I wish i could describe that sermon but it is past my power.
I cannot even render faithfully the effect it produced on me.
This grew to force compressed, condensed, controlled.
Meantime a month was gone.
Looking up as i drew near you have a question to ask of me?
And they will go in three days now?
What is the employment you had in view, mr. rivers?
I hope this delay will not have increased the difficulty of securing it.
He again paused there seemed a reluctance to continue.
I said, as he again paused proceed.
The conclusions drawn from this scrutiny he partially expressed in his succeeding observations.
Do explain, i urged, when he halted once more.
I will and you shall hear how poor the proposal is, how trivial how cramping.
I established one for boys i mean now to open a second school for girls.
Will you be this mistress?
Knitting, sewing, reading, writing, ciphering, will be all you will have to teach.
What will you do with your accomplishments?
What, with the largest portion of your mind sentiments tastes?
Save them till they are wanted.
You know what you undertake, then?
And when will you commence the exercise of your function?
Very well so be it.
He rose and walked through the room.
Standing still, he again looked at me.
What do you disapprove of, mr. rivers?
You will not stay at morton long no, no!
What is your reason for saying so?
He started at the word ambitious.
What made you think of ambition?
I know i am but how did you find it out?
I was speaking of myself.
Well, if you are not ambitious, you are he paused.
I mean, that human affections and sympathies have a most powerful hold on you.
You hear now how i contradict myself.
Well, propensities and principles must be reconciled by some means.
St. john looks quiet, jane but he hides a fever in his vitals.
It is right, noble, christian yet it breaks my heart!
And the tears gushed to her fine eyes.
Mary bent her head low over her work.
We are now without father we shall soon be without home and brother, she murmured.
St. john passed the window reading a letter.
Our uncle john is dead, said he.
She riveted a searching gaze on her brother's face.
She demanded, in a low voice.
He replied, maintaining a marble immobility of feature.
He threw the letter into her lap.
She glanced over it, and handed it to mary.
Mary perused it in silence, and returned it to her brother.
All three looked at each other, and all three smiled a dreary, pensive smile enough.
We can yet live, said diana at last.
At any rate, it makes us no worse off than we were before, remarked mary.
He folded the letter, locked it in his desk, and again went out.
For some minutes no one spoke.
Diana then turned to me.
He was my mother's brother.
My father and he quarrelled long ago.
Mutual recrimination passed between them they parted in anger, and were never reconciled.
The next day i left marsh end for morton.
The day after, diana and mary quitted it for distant b .
I am sitting alone on the hearth.
This morning, the village school opened.
But three of the number can read none write or cipher.
Several knit, and a few sew a little.
They speak with the broadest accent of the district.
At present, they and i have a difficulty in understanding each other's language.
Not to deceive myself, i must reply no i felt desolate to a degree.
I felt yes, idiot that i am i felt degraded.
Meantime, let me ask myself one question which is better?
He did love me no one will ever love me so again.
But where am i wandering, and what am i saying, and above all, feeling?
God directed me to a correct choice i thank his providence for the guidance!
The birds were singing their last strains the air was mild, the dew was balm.
I asked him to come in.
I think it contains a colour box, pencils, and paper.
I approached to take it a welcome gift it was.
Have you found your first day's work harder than you expected?
But perhaps your accommodations your cottage your furniture have disappointed your expectations?
All i see has made me thankful, not despondent.
But you feel solitude an oppression?
The little house there behind you is dark and empty.
It is what i mean to do, i answered.
I considered my life was so wretched, it must be changed, or i must die.
A missionary i resolved to be.
And good evening, old carlo.
He turned at last, with measured deliberation.
A vision, as it seemed to me, had risen at his side.
What did st. john rivers think of this earthly angel?
Oh, i only came home from s this afternoon.
It is, said st. john.
Do you think you shall like morton?
I have many inducements to do so.
Did you find your scholars as attentive as you expected?
Do you like your house?
Have i furnished it nicely?
And made a good choice of an attendant for you in alice wood?
She is teachable and handy.
I shall come up and help you to teach sometimes, she added.
Mr. rivers, i have been so gay during my stay at s .
Last night, or rather this morning, i was dancing till two o'clock.
He lifted his gaze, too, from the daisies, and turned it on her.
An unsmiling, a searching, a meaning gaze it was.
As he stood, mute and grave, she again fell to caressing carlo.
Poor carlo loves me, said she.
I saw his solemn eye melt with sudden fire, and flicker with resistless emotion.
But he curbed it, i think, as a resolute rider would curb a rearing steed.
He responded neither by word nor movement to the gentle advances made him.
Papa says you never come to see us now, continued miss oliver, looking up.
You are quite a stranger at vale hall.
It is not a seasonable hour to intrude on mr. oliver, answered st. john.
But i declare it is.
Now, mr. rivers, do come.
Why are you so very shy, and so very sombre?
She filled up the hiatus his silence left by a reply of her own.
She exclaimed, shaking her beautiful curled head, as if shocked at herself.
I am so giddy and thoughtless!
I am sure i pity you.
Do come and see papa.
Not to night, miss rosamond, not to night.
She held out her hand.
He repeated, in a voice low and hollow as an echo.
She turned, but in a moment returned.
Well might she put the question his face was blanched as her gown.
Quite well, he enunciated and, with a bow, he left the gate.
She went one way he another.
Diana rivers had designated her brother inexorable as death.
It was truly hard work at first.
I had amongst my scholars several farmers' daughters young women grown, almost.
Their parents then loaded me with attentions.
I felt i became a favourite in the neighbourhood.
Then i recalled where i was, and how situated.
Rosamond oliver kept her word in coming to visit me.
Her call at the school was generally made in the course of her morning ride.
Keenly, i fear, did the eye of the visitress pierce the young pastor's heart.
It is not despair of success that keeps me dumb.
If i offered my heart, i believe you would accept it.
It will soon be no more than a sacrifice consumed.
Miss oliver already honoured me with frequent visits to my cottage.
She had been indulged from her birth, but was not absolutely spoilt.
She had taken an amiable caprice to me.
I was, however, good, clever, composed, and firm, like him.
She was first transfixed with surprise, and then electrified with delight.
Had i done these pictures?
Did i know french and german?
What a love what a miracle i was!
I drew better than her master in the first school in s .
Would i sketch a portrait of her, to show to papa?
I took a sheet of fine card board, and drew a careful outline.
I found it a large, handsome residence, showing abundant evidences of wealth in the proprietor.
Rosamond was full of glee and pleasure all the time i stayed.
Mr. oliver spoke of mr. rivers of the rivers family with great respect.
All about me was spotless and bright scoured floor, polished grate, and well rubbed chairs.
I am come to see how you are spending your holiday, he said.
Not, i hope, in thought?
No, that is well while you draw you will not feel lonely.
You see, i mistrust you still, though you have borne up wonderfully so far.
The readers of our era are less favoured.
I will not pause either to accuse or repine.
Powerful angels, safe in heaven!
They smile when sordid souls triumph, and feeble ones weep over their destruction.
Mediocrity, no do not let envy prompt you to the thought.
His tall figure sprang erect again with a start he said nothing.
I looked up at him he shunned my eye.
I said first, take a chair, mr. rivers.
But he answered, as he always did, that he could not stay.
I did not observe it closely.
He almost started at my sudden and strange abruptness he looked at me astonished.
Oh, that is nothing yet, i muttered within.
A well executed picture, he said very soft, clear colouring very graceful and correct drawing.
Yes, yes i know all that.
But what of the resemblance?
Mastering some hesitation, he answered, miss oliver, i presume.
He murmured the eye is well managed the colour, light, expression, are perfect.
Would it comfort, or would it wound you to have a similar painting?
Or would the sight of it bring recollections calculated to enervate and distress?
I discerned he was now neither angry nor shocked at my audacity.
You ought to marry her.
Certainly better than she likes any one else.
Don't imagine such hard things.
She is mine i am hers this present life and passing world suffice to me.
I humoured him the watch ticked on he breathed fast and low i stood silent.
Now, said he, that little space was given to delirium and delusion.
I gazed at him in wonder.
I could not help ejaculating.
Rosamond a sufferer, a labourer, a female apostle?
But you need not be a missionary.
You might relinquish that scheme.
My foundation laid on earth for a mansion in heaven?
It is dearer than the blood in my veins.
It is what i have to look forward to, and to live for.
After a considerable pause, i said and miss oliver?
Are her disappointment and sorrow of no interest to you?
You speak coolly enough but you suffer in the conflict.
You tremble and become flushed whenever miss oliver enters the schoolroom.
Again the surprised expression crossed his face.
He had not imagined that a woman would dare to speak so to a man.
For me, i felt at home in this sort of discourse.
You are original, said he, and not timid.
You think them more profound and potent than they are.
You give me a larger allowance of sympathy than i have a just claim to.
When i colour, and when i shade before miss oliver, i do not pity myself.
Know me to be what i am a cold hard man.
Natural affection only, of all the sentiments, has permanent power over me.
You would describe yourself as a mere pagan philosopher, i said.
As his disciple i adopt his pure, his merciful, his benignant doctrines.
I advocate them i am sworn to spread them.
Having said this, he took his hat, which lay on the table beside my palette.
Once more he looked at the portrait.
She is lovely, he murmured.
She is well named the rose of the world, indeed!
And may i not paint one like it for you?
It disappeared in his glove and, with one hasty nod and good afternoon, he vanished.
I exclaimed, using an expression of the district, that caps the globe, however!
I heard a noise the wind, i thought, shook the door.
How very easily alarmed you are!
He stamped the snow from his boots.
Then he approached the fire.
One drift took me up to the waist happily the snow is quite soft yet.
But why are you come?
I could not forbear saying.
It struck me that his hand looked wasted like his face.
Not at all, said he i care for myself when necessary.
What do you see amiss in me?
He responded shortly and somewhat testily.
So i snuffed the candle and resumed the perusal of marmion.
Have you heard from diana and mary lately?
Not since the letter i showed you a week ago.
There has not been any change made about your own arrangements?
You will not be summoned to leave england sooner than you expected?
I fear not, indeed such chance is too good to befall me.
Baffled so far, i changed my ground.
I bethought myself to talk about the school and my scholars.
Mr. oliver pays for two.
He means to give the whole school a treat at christmas.
It is like her she is so good natured.
Again came the blank of a pause the clock struck eight strokes.
It aroused him he uncrossed his legs, sat erect, turned to me.
Leave your book a moment, and come a little nearer the fire, he said.
Wondering, and of my wonder finding no end, i complied.
For the rest, whether trite or novel, it is short.
You start did you hear a noise?
Is it not an odd tale?
How and where is he?
Did no one go to thornfield hall, then?
Did no one see mr. rochester?
But they wrote to him?
And what did he say?
I dared not answer the question.
He must have been a bad man, observed mr. rivers.
You don't know him don't pronounce an opinion upon him, i said, with warmth.
Since you won't ask the governess's name, i must tell it of my own accord.
You own the name and renounce the alias ?
Yes yes but where is mr. briggs?
He perhaps knows more of mr. rochester than you do.
Well, what did he want?
Yes, you, rich quite an heiress.
Here was a new card turned up!
One does not jump, and spring, and shout hurrah!
Besides, the words legacy, bequest, go side by side with the words, death, funeral.
You unbend your forehead at last, said mr. rivers.
I thought medusa had looked at you, and that you were turning to stone.
Perhaps now you will ask how much you are worth?
How much am i worth?
Here was a new stunner i had been calculating on four or five thousand.
It is a large sum don't you think there is a mistake?
Perhaps you have read the figures wrong it may be two thousand!
It is written in letters, not figures, twenty thousand.
Mr. rivers rose now and put his cloak on.
He was lifting the latch a sudden thought occurred to me.
No that does not satisfy me!
And as he turned from the door, i placed myself between it and him.
You certainly shall not go till you have told me all, i said.
I would rather not just now.
I would rather diana or mary informed you.
But i apprised you that i was a hard man, said he, difficult to persuade.
And i am a hard woman, impossible to put off.
And then, he pursued, i am cold no fervour infects me.
Whereas i am hot, and fire dissolves ice.
Besides, you must know some day, as well now as later.
Your name is jane eyre?
Of course that was all settled before.
You are not, perhaps, aware that i am your namesake?
That i was christened st. john eyre rivers?
Again he was going, but i set my back against the door.
I paused he stood before me, hat in hand, looking composed enough.
I resumed your mother was my father's sister?
My uncle john was your uncle john?
You, diana, and mary are his sister's children, as i am his brother's child?
Glorious discovery to a lonely wretch!
A mine of pure, genial affections.
I now clapped my hands in sudden joy my pulse bounded, my veins thrilled.
Did i not say you neglected essential points to pursue trifles?
I say again, i am glad!
And what sort of an effect will the bequest have on you?
You wander your head becomes confused.
Perhaps, if you explained yourself a little more fully, i should comprehend better.
What is there to explain?
I have intimated my view of the case i am incapable of taking any other.
I am not brutally selfish, blindly unjust, or fiendishly ungrateful.
Besides, i am resolved i will have a home and connections.
I abandon to you, then, what is absolutely superfluous to me.
I do see a certain justice but it is contrary to all custom.
Yes at the distance of a thousand leagues!
I, wealthy gorged with gold i never earned and do not merit!
I don't want to marry, and never shall marry.
Thank you that contents me for to night.
And the school, miss eyre?
It must now be shut up, i suppose?
I will retain my post of mistress till you get a substitute.
He smiled approbation we shook hands, and he took leave.
Do you consider you have got your reward for a season of exertion?
Asked mr. rivers, when they were gone.
And you have only toiled a few months!
Would not a life devoted to the task of regenerating your race be well spent?
What sudden eagerness is this you evince?
What are you going to do?
To be active as active as i can.
Yes, to go with me to moor house.
I thought you were for flying off on some excursion.
It is better so hannah shall go with you.
What aim, what purpose, what ambition in life have you now?
St. john smiled slightly still he was dissatisfied.
The best things the world has!
I mean, on the contrary, to be busy.
I hope your energies will then once more trouble you with their strength.
I looked at him with surprise.
St. john, i said, i think you are almost wicked to talk so.
Jane, i shall watch you closely and anxiously i warn you of that.
Yes just as if you were speaking greek.
I feel i have adequate cause to be happy, and i will be happy.
The eventful thursday at length came.
Approaching the hearth, he asked, if i was at last satisfied with housemaid's work?
With some difficulty, i got him to make the tour of the house.
I thought perhaps the alterations had disturbed some old associations he valued.
I inquired whether this was the case no doubt in a somewhat crest fallen tone.
By the bye, could i tell him where such a book was?
Now, i did not like this, reader.
A merry child would have the advantage of him on this hearth.
He is right to choose a missionary's career i see it now.
Cried hannah, throwing open the parlour door.
At the same moment old carlo barked joyfully.
It was now dark but a rumbling of wheels was audible.
Hannah soon had a lantern lit.
While the driver and hannah brought in the boxes, they demanded st. john.
At this moment he advanced from the parlour.
They both threw their arms round his neck at once.
Where does she live, hannah?
Tell him i will go.
I'm sure, sir, you had better not.
And then it is such a bitter night the keenest wind you ever felt.
You had better send word, sir, that you will be there in the morning.
It was then nine o'clock he did not return till midnight.
Starved and tired enough he was but he looked happier than when he set out.
I am afraid the whole of the ensuing week tried his patience.
Unchanged and unchangeable, was the reply.
But two months they met in october at the county ball at s .
Would not such another ruin you?
So saying, he returned to his papers and his silence.
Jane, what are you doing?
I want you to give up german and learn hindostanee.
You are not in earnest?
In such earnest that i must have it so and i will tell you why.
Would i do him this favour?
He answered quietly i know it.
When he said go, i went come, i came do this, i did it.
Diana, who chanced to be in a frolicsome humour , exclaimed st. john!
She pushed me towards him.
Not his ascendancy alone, however, held me in thrall at present.
I then wrote to mrs. fairfax, entreating information on the subject.
I wrote again there was a chance of my first letter having missed.
A fine spring shone round me, which i could not enjoy.
I will call diana and mary.
No i want only one companion this morning, and that must be you.
I took a seat st. john stood near me.
Strange words of a strange love!
An austere patriot's passion for his fatherland!
God will protect you for you have undertaken his work, i answered.
Yes, said he, there is my glory and joy.
I am the servant of an infallible master.
Those are few in number, and difficult to discover.
And what does your heart say?
My heart is mute, my heart is mute, i answered, struck and thrilled.
Then i must speak for it, continued the deep, relentless voice.
Jane, come with me to india come as my helpmeet and fellow labourer.
The glen and sky spun round the hills heaved!
I cried, have some mercy!
He continued god and nature intended you for a missionary's wife.
A missionary's wife you must shall be.
I am not fit for it i have no vocation, i said.
He had calculated on these first objections he was not irritated by them.
Who is fit for it?
Or who, that ever was truly called, believed himself worthy of the summons?
I, for instance, am but dust and ashes.
Think like me, jane trust like me.
I do not understand a missionary life i have never studied missionary labours.
But my powers where are they for this undertaking?
I do not feel them.
Nothing speaks or stirs in me while you talk.
I am sensible of no light kindling no life quickening no voice counselling or cheering.
I have an answer for you hear it.
My iron shroud contracted round me persuasion advanced with slow sure step.
He waited for an answer.
I demanded a quarter of an hour to think, before i again hazarded a reply.
The case is very plain before me.
I believe i must say, yes and yet i shudder.
That, too, is very clear to my vision.
Yes, i can work as hard as he can, and with as little grudging.
Consent, then, to his demand is possible but for one item one dreadful item.
He prizes me as a soldier would a good weapon and that is all.
No such a martyrdom would be monstrous.
I will never undergo it.
He started to his feet and approached me.
I am ready to go to india, if i may go free.
Your answer requires a commentary, he said it is not clear.
Adopted fraternity will not do in this case.
Do you not see it, jane?
Consider a moment your strong sense will guide you.
We cannot we cannot, he answered, with short, sharp determination it would not do.
You have said you will go with me to india remember you have said that.
Seek one elsewhere than in me, st. john seek one fitted to you.
One fitted to my purpose, you mean fitted to my vocation.
For them he has no use i retain them.
You cannot you ought not.
Do you think god will be satisfied with half an oblation?
Will he accept a mutilated sacrifice?
I cannot accept on his behalf a divided allegiance it must be entire.
I will give my heart to god, i said.
You do not want it.
I had silently feared st. john till now, because i had not understood him.
He had held me in awe, because he had held me in doubt.
I saw his fallibilities i comprehended them.
The veil fell from his hardness and despotism.
His eye, bent on me, expressed at once stern surprise and keen inquiry.
Is she sarcastic, and sarcastic to me !
I exclaimed, when i had got so far in my meditation.
It would do, i affirmed with some disdain, perfectly well.
And there are obstacles in the way they must be hewn down.
Jane, you would not repent marrying me be certain of that we must be married.
He looked at me fixedly, compressing his well cut lips while he did so.
I was touched by his gentle tone, and overawed by his high, calm mien.
If the reality were required, what should we do?
My dear cousin, abandon your scheme of marriage forget it.
Turning from me, he once more looked to river, looked to hill.
Good night, st. john, said i.
Good night, jane, he replied calmly.
Then shake hands, i added.
What a cold, loose touch, he impressed on my fingers!
And with that answer he left me.
I would much rather he had knocked me down.
All this was torture to me refined, lingering torture.
Especially i felt this when i made any attempt to propitiate him.
No ruth met my ruth.
St. john, i am unhappy because you are still angry with me.
No, st. john, we are not friends as we were.
For my part, i wish you no ill and all good.
Your wish is reasonable, and i am far from regarding you as a stranger.
This, spoken in a cool, tranquil tone, was mortifying and baffling enough.
I deeply venerated my cousin's talent and principle.
His friendship was of value to me to lose it tried me severely.
I would not so soon relinquish the attempt to reconquer it.
Must we part in this way, st. john?
He now turned quite from the moon and faced me.
When i go to india, jane, will i leave you!
Do you not go to india?
You said i could not unless i married you.
And you will not marry me!
You adhere to that resolution?
How much of the fall of the avalanche is in their anger?
Of the breaking up of the frozen sea in their displeasure?
St. john, i will not marry you.
I adhere to my resolution.
Once more, why this refusal?
If i were to marry you, you would kill me.
You are killing me now.
His lips and cheeks turned white quite white.
I should kill you i am killing you ?
Your words are such as ought not to be used violent, unfeminine, and untrue.
I had finished the business now.
Now you will indeed hate me, i said.
A fresh wrong did these words inflict the worse, because they touched on the truth.
That bloodless lip quivered to a temporary spasm.
I knew the steely ire i had whetted.
Most bitterly he smiled most decidedly he withdrew his hand from mine.
Said he, after a considerable pause.
Yes, i will, as your assistant, i answered.
A very long silence succeeded.
That you have done so, i regret for your sake.
Anything like a tangible reproach gave me courage at once.
Keep to common sense, st. john you are verging on nonsense.
You pretend to be shocked by what i have said.
I say again, i will be your curate, if you like, but never your wife.
Again he turned lividly pale but, as before, controlled his passion perfectly.
I replied there is no dishonour, no breach of promise, no desertion in the case.
I am not under the slightest obligation to go to india, especially with strangers.
You are afraid of yourself, he said, curling his lip.
I know where your heart turns and to what it clings.
The interest you cherish is lawless and unconsecrated.
You think of mr. rochester?
I confessed it by silence.
Are you going to seek mr. rochester?
I must find out what is become of him.
I had thought i recognised in you one of the chosen.
He was soon out of sight.
On re entering the parlour, i found diana standing at the window, looking very thoughtful.
Jane, she said, you are always agitated and pale now.
I am sure there is something the matter.
Tell me what business st. john and you have on hands.
I wish he loved you does he, jane?
I put her cool hand to my hot forehead no, die, not one whit.
Mary and i had both concluded he wished you to marry him.
He does he has asked me to be his wife.
That is just what we hoped and thought!
And you will marry him, jane, won't you?
And then he will stay in england.
He wishes you to go to india?
You would not live three months there, i am certain.
You never shall go you have not consented, have you, jane?
I have refused to marry him and have consequently displeased him?
It was frantic folly to do so, jane.
I am astonished you found courage to refuse his hand.
You do not love him then, jane?
Yet he is a handsome fellow.
And i am so plain, you see, die.
What makes you say he does not love you, jane?
You should hear himself on the subject.
Insupportable unnatural out of the question!
In that case, my lot would become unspeakably wretched.
And yet st. john is a good man, said diana.
I will leave you, diana.
And i hastened upstairs as i saw him entering the garden.
But i was forced to meet him again at supper.
During that meal he appeared just as composed as usual.
For the evening reading before prayers, he selected the twenty first chapter of revelation.
Henceforward, i knew what fate st. john feared for me.
He asked, he urged, he claimed the boon of a brand snatched from the burning.
My master was long suffering so will i be.
Remember the fate of dives, who had his good things in this life.
He laid his hand on my head as he uttered the last words.
I was a fool both times.
I stood motionless under my hierophant's touch.
My refusals were forgotten my fears overcome my wrestlings paralysed.
My marriage with st. john was fast becoming the possible.
All was changing utterly with a sudden sweep.
The dim room was full of visions.
The inquiry was put in gentle tones he drew me to him as gently.
How far more potent is it than force!
I could resist st. john's wrath i grew pliant as a reed under his kindness.
His nature was not changed by one hour of solemn prayer it was only elevated.
I contended with my inward dimness of vision, before which clouds yet rolled.
I sincerely, deeply, fervently longed to do what was right and only that.
Show me, show me the path!
The one candle was dying out the room was full of moonlight.
My heart beat fast and thick i heard its throb.
They rose expectant eye and ear waited while the flesh quivered on my bones.
I saw nothing, but i heard a voice somewhere cry jane!
I might have said, where is it?
I had heard it where, or whence, for ever impossible to know!
I flew to the door and looked into the passage it was dark.
I ran out into the garden it was void.
The hills beyond marsh glen sent the answer faintly back where are you?
The wind sighed low in the firs all was moorland loneliness and midnight hush.
I commented, as that spectre rose up black by the black yew at the gate.
This is not thy deception, nor thy witchcraft it is the work of nature.
She was roused, and did no miracle but her best.
I broke from st. john, who had followed, and would have detained me.
It was my time to assume ascendency.
My powers were in play and in force.
Where there is energy to command well enough, obedience never fails.
Chapter xxxvi the daylight came.
Meantime, i heard st. john quit his room.
It bore these words you left me too suddenly last night.
I shall expect your clear decision when i return this day fortnight.
I shall pray for you hourly.
I heard the front door open, and st. john pass out.
Looking through the window, i saw him traverse the garden.
It wanted yet two hours of breakfast time.
I asked was it a mere nervous impression a delusion?
I could not conceive or believe it was more like an inspiration.
Letters have proved of no avail personal inquiry shall replace them.
I looked very pale, she observed.
It stopped as i beckoned.
Once more on the road to thornfield, i felt like the messenger pigeon flying home.
It was a journey of six and thirty hours.
How far is thornfield hall from here?
I asked of the ostler.
Just two miles, ma'am, across the fields.
My journey is closed, i thought to myself.
My heart leapt up i was already on my master's very lands.
You have lost your labour you had better go no farther, urged the monitor.
Go up to that man, and inquire if mr. rochester be at home.
The suggestion was sensible, and yet i could not force myself to act on it.
I so dreaded a reply that would crush me with despair.
To prolong doubt was to prolong hope.
I might yet once more see the hall under the ray of her star.
How i looked forward to catch the first view of the well known woods!
Strange delight inspired me on i hastened.
Could i but see him!
Surely, in that case, i should not be so mad as to run to him?
I cannot tell i am not certain.
And if i did what then?
The crows sailing overhead perhaps watched me while i took this survey.
I wonder what they thought.
What affectation of diffidence was this at first?
They might have demanded what stupid regardlessness now?
How hurried was their first glance!
How he calls aloud a name, and drops his burden, and gazes on it wildly!
He thought his love slept sweetly he finds she is stone dead.
I looked with timorous joy towards a stately house i saw a blackened ruin.
No need to cower behind a gate post, indeed!
To peep up at chamber lattices, fearing life was astir behind them!
The lawn, the grounds were trodden and waste the portal yawned void.
And there was the silence of death about it the solitude of a lonesome wild.
What story belonged to this disaster?
What loss, besides mortar and marble and wood work had followed upon it?
Had life been wrecked as well as property?
Where meantime was the hapless owner of this wreck?
Some answer must be had to these questions.
I could find it nowhere but at the inn, and thither, ere long, i returned.
The host himself brought my breakfast into the parlour.
The host was a respectable looking, middle aged man.
You know thornfield hall, of course?
I managed to say at last.
Yes, ma'am i lived there once.
Not in my time, i thought you are a stranger to me.
I was the late mr. rochester's butler, he added.
I mean the present gentleman, mr. edward's father, he explained.
I breathed again my blood resumed its flow.
Is mr. rochester living at thornfield hall now?
No one is living there.
It was a terrible spectacle i witnessed it myself.
Yes, that was ever the hour of fatality at thornfield.
Was it known how it originated?
They guessed, ma'am they guessed.
Indeed, i should say it was ascertained beyond a doubt.
I have heard something of it.
But a queer thing happened a year since a very queer thing.
I feared now to hear my own story.
I endeavoured to recall him to the main fact.
This lady, ma'am, he answered, turned out to be mr. rochester's wife!
The discovery was brought about in the strangest way.
I'm coming to that, ma'am that mr. edward fell in love with.
She was a little small thing, they say, almost like a child.
I never saw her myself but i've heard leah, the house maid, tell of her.
Leah liked her well enough.
Well, he would marry her.
Was it suspected that this lunatic, mrs. rochester, had any hand in it?
He would be alone, too.
Miss adele, a ward he had, was put to school.
Did he not leave england?
Then mr. rochester was at home when the fire broke out?
Ay, dead as the stones on which her brains and blood were scattered.
You may well say so, ma'am it was frightful!
Were any other lives lost?
No perhaps it would have been better if there had.
He ejaculated, i little thought ever to have seen it!
You said he was alive?
Yes, yes he is alive but many think he had better be dead.
My blood was again running cold.
And the man seemed resolved to protract it.
He is stone blind, he said at last.
Yes, he is stone blind, is mr. edward.
I had dreaded he was mad.
I summoned strength to ask what had caused this calamity.
The other eye inflamed he lost the sight of that also.
He is now helpless, indeed blind and a cripple.
Where does he now live?
Old john and his wife he would have none else.
He is quite broken down, they say.
Have you any sort of conveyance?
We have a chaise, ma'am, a very handsome chaise.
I had heard of it before.
Mr. rochester often spoke of it, and sometimes went there.
His father had purchased the estate for the sake of the game covers.
I thought i had taken a wrong direction and lost my way.
The darkness of natural as well as of sylvan dusk gathered over me.
I looked round in search of another road.
There was none all was interwoven stem, columnar trunk, dense summer foliage no opening anywhere.
Can there be life here?
I had no difficulty in restraining my voice from exclamation, my step from hasty advance.
And, reader, do you think i feared him in his blind ferocity?
If you do, you little know me.
I would not accost him yet.
He descended the one step, and advanced slowly and gropingly towards the grass plat.
Where was his daring stride now?
Then he paused, as if he knew not which way to turn.
At this moment john approached him from some quarter.
Will you take my arm, sir?
He said there is a heavy shower coming on had you not better go in?
Let me alone, was the answer.
John withdrew without having observed me.
Mr. rochester now tried to walk about vainly, all was too uncertain.
He groped his way back to the house, and, re entering it, closed the door.
I now drew near and knocked john's wife opened for me.
Mary, i said, how are you?
She started as if she had seen a ghost i calmed her.
Just at this moment the parlour bell rang.
I don't think he will see you, she answered he refuses everybody.
When she returned, i inquired what he had said.
You are to send in your name and your business, she replied.
Is that what he rang for?
Yes he always has candles brought in at dark, though he is blind.
Give the tray to me i will carry it in.
I took it from her hand she pointed me out the parlour door.
Mary opened the door for me, and shut it behind me.
I set it on the table then patted him, and said softly, lie down!
Give me the water, mary, he said.
I approached him with the now only half filled glass pilot followed me, still excited.
This is you, mary, is it not?
Mary is in the kitchen, i answered.
He ordered, imperiously and aloud.
Will you have a little more water, sir?
I spilt half of what was in the glass, i said.
Pilot knows me, and john and mary know i am here.
I came only this evening, i answered.
What delusion has come over me?
What sweet madness has seized me?
And where is the speaker?
Is it only a voice?
Whatever whoever you are be perceptible to the touch or i cannot live!
He groped i arrested his wandering hand, and prisoned it in both mine.
He cried her small, slight fingers!
If so there must be more of her.
This is her shape this is her size and this her voice, i added.
She is all here her heart, too.
I am glad to be so near you again.
Jane eyre, was all he said.
Which i never will, sir, from this day.
Never will, says the vision?
There, sir and there!
It is you is it, jane?
You are come back to me then?
And you do not lie dead in some ditch under some stream?
And you are not a pining outcast amongst strangers?
I am an independent woman now.
My uncle in madeira is dead, and he left me five thousand pounds.
This is practical this is real!
He cried i should never dream that.
Are you an independent woman?
And you will stay with me?
I will be your neighbour, your nurse, your housekeeper.
I felt a little embarrassed.
No no jane you must not go.
I have little left in myself i must have you.
The world may laugh may call me absurd, selfish but it does not signify.
Well, sir, i will stay with you i have said so.
Yes but you understand one thing by staying with me and i understand another.
I don't care about being married.
He relapsed again into gloom.
I resumed a livelier vein of conversation.
It is a mere stump a ghastly sight!
Don't you think so, jane?
Don't tell me so lest i should say something disparaging to your judgment.
Can you tell when there is a good fire?
Yes with the right eye i see a glow a ruddy haze.
And you see the candles?
Very dimly each is a luminous cloud.
No, my fairy but i am only too thankful to hear and feel you.
When do you take supper?
But you shall have some to night.
I am hungry so are you, i daresay, only you forget.
Cheered, as i have said, he was and yet but by fits.
You are altogether a human being, jane?
You are certain of that?
I conscientiously believe so, mr. rochester.
Because i had come in, in mary's stead, with the tray.
And there is enchantment in the very hour i am now spending with you.
Yes for her restoration i longed, far more than for that of my lost sight.
How can it be that jane is with me, and says she loves me?
Will she not depart as suddenly as she came?
To morrow, i fear i shall find her no more.
Have you a pocket comb about you, sir?
Just to comb out this shaggy black mane.
Very, sir you always were, you know.
The wickedness has not been taken out of you, wherever you have sojourned.
Who the deuce have you been with?
Who have you been with, jane?
You mocking changeling fairy born and human bred!
You make me feel as i have not felt these twelve months.
There, sir, you are redd up and made decent.
Just one word, jane were there only ladies in the house where you have been?
I laughed and made my escape, still laughing as i ran upstairs.
As soon as mary came down i heard the question is miss eyre here?
Then which room did you put her into?
Go and ask if she wants anything and when she will come down.
I came down as soon as i thought there was a prospect of breakfast.
His countenance reminded one of a lamp quenched, waiting to be re lit and alas!
It is a bright, sunny morning, sir, i said.
I had wakened the glow his features beamed.
Oh, you are indeed there, my skylark!
You are not gone not vanished?
Most of the morning was spent in the open air.
Why should i, when both he and i were happier near than apart?
Pilot lay beside us all was quiet.
He broke out suddenly while clasping me in his arms cruel, cruel deserter!
What could my darling do, i asked, left destitute and penniless?
And what did she do?
Thus urged, i began the narrative of my experience for the last year.
I had endured, he was certain, more than i had confessed to him.
Of course, st. john rivers' name came in frequently in the progress of my tale.
When i had done, that name was immediately taken up.
This st. john, then, is your cousin?
You have spoken of him often do you like him?
He was a very good man, sir i could not help liking him.
Does that mean a respectable well conducted man of fifty?
Or what does it mean?
St john was only twenty nine, sir.
Jeune encore ,' as the french say.
Is he a person of low stature, phlegmatic, and plain.
Great and exalted deeds are what he lives to perform.
That is probably rather soft?
He means well but you shrug your shoulders to hear him talk?
He talks little, sir what he does say is ever to the point.
His brain is first rate, i should think not impressible, but vigorous.
Is he an able man, then?
St. john is an accomplished and profound scholar.
His manners, i think, you said are not to your taste?
He is a handsome man tall, fair, with blue eyes, and a grecian profile.
Did you like him, jane?
Yes, mr. rochester, i liked him but you asked me that before.
I perceived, of course, the drift of my interlocutor.
I would not, therefore, immediately charm the snake.
Perhaps you would rather not sit any longer on my knee, miss eyre?
Was the next somewhat unexpected observation.
The picture you have just drawn is suggestive of a rather too overwhelming contrast.
I never thought of it, before but you certainly are rather like vulcan, sir.
Then followed this cross examination.
St. john made you schoolmistress of morton before he knew you were his cousin?
You would often see him?
He would visit the school sometimes?
He would approve of your plans, jane?
I know they would be clever, for you are a talented creature!
He approved of them yes.
He would discover many things in you he could not have expected to find?
Some of your accomplishments are not ordinary.
I don't know about that.
How long did you reside with him and his sisters after the cousinship was discovered?
Did rivers spend much time with the ladies of his family?
And what did you do meantime?
I learnt german, at first.
He did not understand german.
Did he teach you nothing?
Did you ask to learn?
He wished to teach you?
Why did he wish it?
Of what use could hindostanee be to you?
He intended me to go with him to india.
Here i reach the root of the matter.
He wanted you to marry him?
He asked me to marry him.
That is a fiction an impudent invention to vex me.
Miss eyre, i repeat it, you can leave me.
How often am i to say the same thing?
Because i am comfortable there.
Oh, till this moment, i thought my little jane was all mine!
But it is useless grieving.
Jane, leave me go and marry rivers.
When i hear it, it carries me back a year.
I forget that you have formed a new tie.
But i am not a fool go where must i go, sir?
Your own way with the husband you have chosen.
You know this st. john rivers.
He is not my husband, nor ever will be.
He does not love me i do not love him.
He loves a beautiful young lady called rosamond.
He is good and great, but severe and, for me, cold as an iceberg.
He has no indulgence for me no fondness.
He sees nothing attractive in me not even youth only a few useful mental points.
Then i must leave you, sir, to go to him?
I shuddered involuntarily, and clung instinctively closer to my blind but beloved master.
Is such really the state of matters between you and rivers?
Oh, you need not be jealous!
Again, as he kissed me, painful thoughts darkened his aspect.
I caressed, in order to soothe him.
You are no ruin, sir no lightning struck tree you are green and vigorous.
Again he smiled i gave him comfort.
You speak of friends, jane?
But i want a wife.
Yes is it news to you?
Of course you said nothing about it before.
That depends on circumstances, sir on your choice.
Which you shall make for me, jane.
I will abide by your decision.
Choose then, sir her who loves you best .
I will at least choose her i love best .
A poor blind man, whom you will have to lead about by the hand?
A crippled man, twenty years older than you, whom you will have to wait on?
God bless you and reward you!
Because you delight in sacrifice.
Famine for food, expectation for content.
If so, then certainly i delight in sacrifice.
And to bear with my infirmities, jane to overlook my deficiencies.
Which are none, sir, to me.
Jane suits me do i suit her?
To the finest fibre of my nature, sir.
He looked and spoke with eagerness his old impetuosity was rising.
Let me look at your watch.
It is nearly four o'clock in the afternoon, sir.
The third day from this must be our wedding day, jane.
Never mind fine clothes and jewels, now all that is not worth a fillip.
The sun has dried up all the rain drops, sir.
The breeze is still it is quite hot.
We will go home through the wood that will be the shadiest way.
He pursued his own thoughts without heeding me.
His chastisements are mighty and one smote me which has humbled me for ever.
I began to experience remorse, repentance the wish for reconcilement to my maker.
I began sometimes to pray very brief prayers they were, but very sincere.
I longed for thee, janet!
Oh, i longed for thee both with soul and flesh!
Did you speak these words aloud?
And it was last monday night, somewhere near midnight?
Yes but the time is of no consequence what followed is the strange point.
Seemed spoken amongst mountains for i heard a hill sent echo repeat the words.
In spirit, i believe we must have met.
I listened to mr. rochester's narrative, but made no disclosure in return.
The coincidence struck me as too awful and inexplicable to be communicated or discussed.
I kept these things then, and pondered them in my heart.
I know it to be otherwise.
Only the last words of the worship were audible.
I thank my maker, that, in the midst of judgment, he has remembered mercy.
Then he stretched his hand out to be led.
We entered the wood, and wended homeward.
Chapter xxxviii conclusion reader, i married him.
A quiet wedding we had he and i, the parson and clerk, were alone present.
John, when i turned to him, was grinning from ear to ear.
I wish you joy, miss!
And he politely pulled his forelock.
Mr. rochester told me to give you and mary this.
I put into his hand a five pound note.
Without waiting to hear more, i left the kitchen.
Diana and mary approved the step unreservedly.
His letter was then calm, and, though very serious, kind.
You have not quite forgotten little adele, have you, reader?
Her frantic joy at beholding me again moved me much.
She looked pale and thin she said she was not happy.
I have now been married ten years.
Literally, i was the apple of his eye.
I had a gold watch chain i answered yes.
And have you a pale blue dress on?
He and i went up to london.
Diana's husband is a captain in the navy, a gallant officer and a good man.
Both captain fitzjames and mr. wharton love their wives, and are loved by them.
As to st. john rivers, he left england he went to india.
He entered on the path he had marked for himself he pursues it still.
A more resolute, indefatigable pioneer never wrought amidst rocks and dangers.
St. john is unmarried he never will marry now.
And why weep for this?
His own words are a pledge of this my master, he says, has forewarned me.
Daily he announces more distinctly, 'surely i come quickly!
And hourly i more eagerly respond, 'amen even so come, lord jesus!
Still i will proudly declare that there is something queer about it.
Else, why should it be let so cheaply?
And why have stood so long untenanted?
John laughs at me, of course, but one expects that in marriage.
John is practical in the extreme.
You see, he does not believe i am sick!
And what can one do?
Personally, i disagree with their ideas.
Personally, i believe that congenial work, with excitement and change, would do me good.
But what is one to do?
So i will let it alone and talk about the house.
There is a delicious garden!
There were greenhouses, too, but they are all broken now.
I get unreasonably angry with john sometimes.
I’m sure i never used to be so sensitive.
I think it is due to this nervous condition.
I don’t like our room a bit.
But john would not hear of it.
He is very careful and loving, and hardly lets me stir without special direction.
So we took the nursery, at the top of the house.
The paint and paper look as if a boys’ school had used it.
I never saw a worse paper in my life.
One of those sprawling flamboyant patterns committing every artistic sin.
No wonder the children hated it!
I should hate it myself if i had to live in this room long.
John is away all day, and even some nights when his cases are serious.
I am glad my case is not serious!
But these nervous troubles are dreadfully depressing.
John does not know how much i really suffer.
He knows there is no reason to suffer, and that satisfies him.
Of course it is only nervousness.
It does weigh on me so not to do my duty in any way!
It is fortunate mary is so good with the baby.
And yet i cannot be with him, it makes me so nervous.
I suppose john never was nervous in his life.
He laughs at me so about this wallpaper!
Then do let us go downstairs, i said, there are such pretty rooms there.
But he is right enough about the beds and windows and things.
I’m really getting quite fond of the big room, all but that horrid paper.
There is a beautiful shaded lane that runs down there from the house.
But i find i get pretty tired when i try.
It is so discouraging not to have any advice and companionship about my work.
I wish i could get well faster.
But i must not think about that.
This paper looks to me as if it knew what a vicious influence it had!
I get positively angry with the impertinence of it and the everlastingness.
Up and down and sideways they crawl, and those absurd, unblinking eyes are everywhere.
I never saw such ravages as the children have made here.
But i don’t mind it a bit only the paper.
Such a dear girl as she is, and so careful of me!
I must not let her find me writing.
She is a perfect, and enthusiastic housekeeper, and hopes for no better profession.
I verily believe she thinks it is the writing which made me sick!
A lovely country, too, full of great elms and velvet meadows.
There’s sister on the stairs!
Well, the fourth of july is over!
The people are gone and i am tired out.
Of course i didn’t do a thing.
Jennie sees to everything now.
But it tired me all the same.
But i don’t want to go there at all.
Besides, it is such an undertaking to go so far.
I cry at nothing, and cry most of the time.
And i am alone a good deal just now.
I’m getting really fond of the room in spite of the wallpaper.
Perhaps because of the wallpaper.
It dwells in my mind so!
It is as good as gymnastics, i assure you.
It is repeated, of course, by the breadths, but not otherwise.
It makes me tired to follow it.
I will take a nap, i guess.
I don’t know why i should write this.
And i know john would think it absurd.
But the effort is getting to be greater than the relief.
Half the time now i am awfully lazy, and lie down ever so much.
He loves me very dearly, and hates to have me sick.
It is getting to be a great effort for me to think straight.
Just this nervous weakness, i suppose.
If we had not used it that blessed child would have!
I can stand it so much easier than a baby, you see.
There are things in that paper that nobody knows but me, or ever will.
Behind that outside pattern the dim shapes get clearer every day.
And it is like a woman stooping down and creeping about behind that pattern.
I don’t like it a bit.
I wonder i begin to think i wish john would take me away from here!
But i tried it last night.
The moon shines in all around, just as the sun does.
What is it, little girl?
Don’t go walking about like that you’ll get cold.
The repairs are not done at home, and i cannot possibly leave town just now.
I am a doctor, dear, and i know.
You are gaining flesh and color, your appetite is better.
I feel really much easier about you.
Said he with a big hug she shall be as sick as she pleases!
And you won’t go away?
Why, how can i, dear?
Really, dear, you are better!
There is nothing so dangerous, so fascinating, to a temperament like yours.
It is a false and foolish fancy.
Can you not trust me as a physician when i tell you so?
It slaps you in the face, knocks you down, and tramples upon you.
It is like a bad dream.
The outside pattern is a florid arabesque, reminding one of a fungus.
That is why i watch it always.
By daylight she is subdued, quiet.
I fancy it is the pattern that keeps her so still.
It keeps me quiet by the hour.
I lie down ever so much now.
John says it is good for me, and to sleep all i can.
It is a very bad habit, i am convinced, for, you see, i don’t sleep.
And that cultivates deceit, for i don’t tell them i’m awake, oh, no!
The fact is, i am getting a little afraid of john.
He seems very queer sometimes, and even jennie has an inexplicable look.
It strikes me occasionally, just as a scientific hypothesis, that perhaps it is the paper!
I caught jennie with her hand on it once.
Did not that sound innocent?
Life is very much more exciting now than it used to be.
You see i have something more to expect, to look forward to, to watch.
I really do eat better, and am more quiet than i was.
John is so pleased to see me improve!
I turned it off with a laugh.
He might even want to take me away.
I don’t want to leave now until i have found it out.
There is a week more, and i think that will be enough.
I’m feeling ever so much better!
In the daytime it is tiresome and perplexing.
I cannot keep count of them, though i have tried conscientiously.
It is the strangest yellow, that wallpaper!
But there is something else about that paper the smell!
It creeps all over the house.
It gets into my hair.
Such a peculiar odor, too!
I have spent hours in trying to analyze it, to find what it smelled like.
In this damp weather it is awful.
I wake up in the night and find it hanging over me.
It used to disturb me at first.
I thought seriously of burning the house to reach the smell.
But now i am used to it.
There is a very funny mark on this wall, low down, near the mopboard.
A streak that runs round the room.
Round and round and round round and round and round it makes me dizzy!
I really have discovered something at last.
Through watching so much at night, when it changes so, i have finally found out.
The front pattern does move and no wonder!
The woman behind shakes it!
And she is all the time trying to climb through.
If those heads were covered or taken off it would not be half so bad.
I think that woman gets out in the daytime!
And i’ll tell you why privately i’ve seen her!
I can see her out of every one of my windows!
I see her on that long shaded lane, creeping up and down.
I see her in those dark grape arbors, creeping all around the garden.
I don’t blame her a bit.
It must be very humiliating to be caught creeping by daylight!
I always lock the door when i creep by daylight.
I can’t do it at night, for i know john would suspect something at once.
And john is so queer now, that i don’t want to irritate him.
I wish he would take another room!
Besides, i don’t want anybody to get that woman out at night but myself.
I often wonder if i could see her out of all the windows at once.
If only that top pattern could be gotten off from the under one!
I mean to try it, little by little.
I have found out another funny thing, but i shan’t tell it this time!
It does not do to trust people too much.
I don’t like the look in his eyes.
And i heard him ask jennie a lot of professional questions about me.
She had a very good report to give.
She said i slept a good deal in the daytime.
John knows i don’t sleep very well at night, for all i’m so quiet!
As if i couldn’t see through him!
Still, i don’t wonder he acts so, sleeping under this paper for three months.
This is the last day, but it is enough.
John is to stay in town over night, and won’t be out until this evening.
Jennie wanted to sleep with me the sly thing!
But i told her i should undoubtedly rest better for a night all alone.
That was clever, for really i wasn’t alone a bit!
A strip about as high as my head and half around the room.
How she betrayed herself that time!
But i am here, and no person touches this paper but me not alive!
She tried to get me out of the room it was too patent!
We shall sleep downstairs to night, and take the boat home to morrow.
I quite enjoy the room, now it is bare again.
How those children did tear about here!
This bedstead is fairly gnawed!
But i must get to work.
I have locked the door and thrown the key down into the front path.
I want to astonish him.
I’ve got a rope up here that even jennie did not find.
If that woman does get out, and tries to get away, i can tie her!
But i forgot i could not reach far without anything to stand on!
This bed will not move!
Then i peeled off all the paper i could reach standing on the floor.
It sticks horribly and the pattern just enjoys it!
All those strangled heads and bulbous eyes and waddling fungus growths just shriek with derision!
I am getting angry enough to do something desperate.
Besides i wouldn’t do it.
I know well enough that a step like that is improper and might be misconstrued.
I wonder if they all come out of that wallpaper as i did?
I don’t want to go outside.
I won’t, even if jennie asks me to.
Why, there’s john at the door!
It is no use, young man, you can’t open it!
How he does call and pound!
Now he’s crying for an axe.
It would be a shame to break down that beautiful door!
That silenced him for a few moments.
Then he said very quietly indeed, open the door, my darling!
The key is down by the front door under a plantain leaf!
He stopped short by the door.
For god’s sake, what are you doing!
I kept on creeping just the same, but i looked at him over my shoulder.
I’ve got out at last, said i, in spite of you and jane!
And i’ve pulled off most of the paper, so you can’t put me back!
Now why should that man have fainted?
I lived there two years and two months.
At present i am a sojourner in civilized life again.
Unfortunately, i am confined to this theme by the narrowness of my experience.
Perhaps these pages are more particularly addressed to poor students.
The better part of the man is soon plowed into the soil for compost.
Their fingers, from excessive toil, are too clumsy and tremble too much for that.
He has no time to be anything but a machine.
Yet we do not treat ourselves nor one another thus tenderly.
Talk of a divinity in man!
His highest duty to fodder and water his horses!
What is his destiny to him compared with the shipping interests?
Does not he drive for squire make a stir?
How godlike, how immortal, is he?
Public opinion is a weak tyrant compared with our own private opinion.
As if you could kill time without injuring eternity.
What is called resignation is confirmed desperation.
There is no play in them, for this comes after work.
But it is a characteristic of wisdom not to do desperate things.
Yet they honestly think there is no choice left.
But alert and healthy natures remember that the sun rose clear.
It is never too late to give up our prejudices.
No way of thinking or doing, however ancient, can be trusted without proof.
What old people say you cannot do you try and find that you can.
Old deeds for old people, and new deeds for new.
If i had remembered this it would have prevented some mistakes.
This was not the light in which i hoed them.
The stars are the apexes of what wonderful triangles!
Nature and human life are as various as our several constitutions.
Who shall say what prospect life offers to another?
What demon possessed me that i behaved so well?
One generation abandons the enterprises of another like stranded vessels.
We may waive just so much care of ourselves as we honestly bestow elsewhere.
Nature is as well adapted to our weakness as to our strength.
The incessant anxiety and strain of some is a well nigh incurable form of disease.
Or, what if we had been taken sick?
To many creatures there is in this sense but one necessary of life, food.
None of the brute creation requires more than food and shelter.
We observe cats and dogs acquiring the same second nature.
In cold weather we eat more, in warm less.
The summer, in some climates, makes possible to man a sort of elysian life.
We know not much about them.
It is remarkable that we know so much of them as we do.
The same is true of the more modern reformers and benefactors of their race.
There are nowadays professors of philosophy, but not philosophers.
Yet it is admirable to profess because it was once admirable to live.
It is to solve some of the problems of life, not only theoretically, but practically.
But why do men degenerate ever?
What makes families run out?
What is the nature of the luxury which enervates and destroys nations?
Are we sure that there is none of it in our own lives?
He is not fed, sheltered, clothed, warmed, like his contemporaries.
I will only hint at some of the enterprises which i have cherished.
To anticipate, not the sunrise and the dawn merely, but, if possible, nature herself!
However, in this case my pains were their own reward.
However, i have not set my heart on that.
Do you wish to buy any baskets?
No, we do not want any, was the reply.
Exclaimed the indian as he went out the gate, do you mean to starve us?
The life which men praise and regard as successful is but one kind.
Why should we exaggerate any one kind at the expense of the others?
I have always endeavored to acquire strict business habits they are indispensable to every man.
These will be good ventures.
But even if the rent is not mended, perhaps the worst vice betrayed is improvidence.
We know but few men, a great many coats and breeches.
He was only a little more weather beaten than when i saw him last.
If you have any enterprise before you, try it in your old clothes.
Our moulting season, like that of the fowls, must be a crisis in our lives.
The loon retires to solitary ponds to spend it.
We don garment after garment, as if we grew like exogenous plants by addition without.
I believe that all races at some seasons wear something equivalent to the shirt.
We worship not the graces, nor the parcæ, but fashion.
She spins and weaves and cuts with full authority.
Every generation laughs at the old fashions, but follows religiously the new.
All costume off a man is pitiful or grotesque.
When the soldier is hit by a cannon ball rags are as becoming as purple.
The manufacturers have learned that this taste is merely whimsical.
Comparatively, tattooing is not the hideous custom which it is called.
It is not barbarous merely because the printing is skin deep and unalterable.
Therefore, though they should fail immediately, they had better aim at something high.
He had seen them asleep thus.
Yet he adds, they are not hardier than other people.
In our climate, in the summer, it was formerly almost solely a covering at night.
Adam and eve, according to the fable, wore the bower before other clothes.
It plays house, as well as horse, having an instinct for it.
From the hearth to the field is a great distance.
Birds do not sing in caves, nor do doves cherish their innocence in dovecots.
Consider first how slight a shelter is absolutely necessary.
This did not appear the worst, nor by any means a despicable alternative.
I am far from jesting.
Some i have seen, sixty or a hundred feet long and thirty feet broad....
But perhaps a man is not required to bury himself.
I doubt if there are three such men in concord.
To get his shoestrings he speculates in herds of cattle.
It has created palaces, but it was not so easy to create noblemen and kings.
But how do the poor minority fare?
The luxury of one class is counterbalanced by the indigence of another.
I refer to the degraded poor, not now to the degraded rich.
Their condition only proves what squalidness may consist with civilization.
But to confine myself to those who are said to be in moderate circumstances.
Why should not our furniture be as simple as the arab’s or the indian’s?
Or what if i were to allow would it not be a singular allowance?
How, then, could i have a furnished house?
When he was refreshed with food and sleep he contemplated his journey again.
Men have become the tools of their tools.
We have adopted christianity merely as an improved method of agri culture.
Without factitious support, man is sure to come to earth again beyond that distance.
Are you one of the ninety seven who fail, or of the three who succeed?
The cart before the horse is neither beautiful nor useful.
But are the more pressing wants satisfied now?
The civilized man is a more experienced and wiser savage.
But to make haste to my own experiment.
James collins’ shanty was considered an uncommonly fine one.
When i called to see it he was not at home.
Mrs. c. came to the door and asked me to view it from the inside.
The hens were driven in by my approach.
The bargain was soon concluded, for james had in the meanwhile returned.
This he assured me was the only encumbrance.
At six i passed him and his family on the road.
It was but two hours’ work.
The house is still but a sort of porch at the entrance of a burrow.
No man was ever more honored in the character of his raisers than i.
They are destined, i trust, to assist at the raising of loftier structures one day.
Shall we forever resign the pleasure of construction to the carpenter?
What does architecture amount to in the experience of the mass of men?
We belong to the community.
Where is this division of labor to end?
And what object does it finally serve?
A sentimental reformer in architecture, he began at the cornice, not at the foundation.
The enemy will find it out.
He may turn pale when the trial comes.
They can do without architecture who have no olives nor wines in the cellar.
So are made the belles lettres and the beaux arts and their professors.
Is he thinking of his last and narrow house?
Toss up a copper for it as well.
What an abundance of leisure he must have!
Why do you take up a handful of dirt?
Better paint your house your own complexion let it turn pale or blush for you.
An enterprise to improve the style of cottage architecture!
When you have got my ornaments ready i will wear them.
I will endeavor to speak a good word for the truth.
Methinks this would exercise their minds as much as mathematics.
Which would be most likely to cut his fingers?...
To my astonishment i was informed on leaving college that i had studied navigation!
Our inventions are wont to be pretty toys, which distract our attention from serious things.
As if the main object were to talk fast and not to talk sensibly.
I doubt if flying childers ever carried a peck of corn to mill.
But i am wiser than that.
I have learned that the swiftest traveller is he that goes afoot.
I say to my friend, suppose we try who will get there first.
The distance is thirty miles the fare ninety cents.
That is almost a day’s wages.
I remember when wages were sixty cents a day for laborers on this very road.
He should have gone up garret at once.
One farmer said that it was good for nothing but to raise cheeping squirrels on.
The seed corn was given me.
This never costs anything to speak of, unless you plant more than enough.
The yellow corn and turnips were too late to come to any thing.
How much more admirable the bhagvat geeta than all the ruins of the east!
Towers and temples are the luxury of princes.
A simple and independent mind does not toil at the bidding of any prince.
To what end, pray, is so much stone hammered?
In arcadia, when i was there, i did not see any hammering stone.
What if equal pains were taken to smooth and polish their manners?
I love better to see stones in place.
The grandeur of thebes was a vulgar grandeur.
Most of the stone a nation hammers goes toward its tomb only.
It costs more than it comes to.
The mainspring is vanity, assisted by the love of garlic and bread and butter.
But to proceed with my statistics.
Nothing was given me of which i have not rendered some account.
I give the latin on account of the savoriness of the trivial name.
It is simpler and more respectable to omit it.
Neither did i put any sal soda, or other acid or alkali, into my bread.
Farinam in mortarium indito, aquæ paulatim addito, subigitoque pulchre.
Ubi bene subegeris, defingito, coquitoque sub testu.
Which i take to mean make kneaded bread thus.
Wash your hands and trough well.
Put the meal into the trough, add water gradually, and knead it thoroughly.
Not a word about leaven.
But i did not always use this staff of life.
I do not learn that the indians ever troubled themselves to go after it.
If they cannot understand that, they cannot understand much that i have to say.
The squirrel tribe tried the same and succeeded.
None is so poor that he need sit on a pumpkin.
Indeed, the more you have of such things the poorer you are.
He was a lucky fox that left his tail in the trap.
The muskrat will gnaw his third leg off to be free.
No wonder man has lost his elasticity.
How often he is at a dead set!
Sir, if i may be so bold, what do you mean by a dead set?
But what shall i do with my furniture?
My gay butterfly is entangled in a spider’s web then.
Throw away the first three at least.
But perchance it would be wisest never to put one’s paw into it.
It is best to avoid the beginnings of evil.
Among the rest was a dried tapeworm.
When a man dies he kicks the dust.
During this fast they abstain from the gratification of every appetite and passion whatever.
A general amnesty is proclaimed all malefactors may return to their town.
But for my part, i preferred the solitary dwelling.
They would part at the first interesting crisis in their adventures.
But all this is very selfish, i have heard some of my townsmen say.
I confess that i have hitherto indulged very little in philanthropic enterprises.
You must have a genius for charity as well as for any thing else.
As for doing good, that is one of the professions which are full.
There is no odor so bad as that which arises from goodness tainted.
It is human, it is divine, carrion.
No, in this case i would rather suffer evil the natural way.
I can find you a newfoundland dog that will do as much.
Philanthropy is not love for one’s fellow man in the broadest sense.
We make curious mistakes sometimes.
It is partly his taste, and not merely his misfortune.
If you give him money, he will perhaps buy more rags with it.
This ducking was the very thing he needed.
Some show their kindness to the poor by employing them in their kitchens.
Would they not be kinder if they employed themselves there?
Society recovers only a tenth part of the property then.
Philanthropy is almost the only virtue which is sufficiently appreciated by mankind.
Nay, it is greatly overrated and it is our selfishness which overrates it.
They were penn, howard, and mrs. fry.
Every one must feel the falsehood and cant of this.
The last were not england’s best men and women only, perhaps, her best philanthropists.
This is a charity that hides a multitude of sins.
From what southern plains comes up the voice of wailing?
Under what latitudes reside the heathen to whom we would send light?
Who is that intemperate and brutal man whom we would redeem?
I never dreamed of any enormity greater than i have committed.
I never knew, and never shall know, a worse man than myself.
Rescue the drowning and tie your shoe strings.
Take your time, and set about some free labor.
Our manners have been corrupted by communication with the saints.
Our hymn books resound with a melodious cursing of god and enduring him forever.
Wherever i sat, there i might live, and the landscape radiated from me accordingly.
What is a house but a sedes , a seat?
Better if a country seat.
But it turned out as i have said.
Many think that seeds improve with age.
The oftener you go there the more it will please you, if it is good.
Olympus is but the outside of the earth every where.
It was suggestive somewhat as a picture in outlines.
The harivansa says, an abode without birds is like a meat without seasoning.
There was pasture enough for my imagination.
Where i lived was as far off as many a region viewed nightly by astronomers.
I have been as sincere a worshipper of aurora as the greeks.
Morning brings back the heroic ages.
The morning, which is the most memorable season of the day, is the awakening hour.
All memorable events, i should say, transpire in morning time and in a morning atmosphere.
The vedas say, all intelligences awake with the morning.
It matters not what the clocks say or the attitudes and labors of men.
Morning is when i am awake and there is a dawn in me.
Moral reform is the effort to throw off sleep.
They are not such poor calculators.
If they had not been overcome with drowsiness, they would have performed something.
I have never yet met a man who was quite awake.
How could i have looked him in the face?
To affect the quality of the day, that is the highest of arts.
Our life is frittered away by detail.
And if railroads are not built, how shall we get to heaven in season?
But if we stay at home and mind our business, who will want railroads?
Did you ever think what those sleepers are that underlie the railroad?
Each one is a man, an irish man, or a yankee man.
They are sound sleepers, i assure you.
Why should we live with such hurry and waste of life?
We are determined to be starved before we are hungry.
As for work , we haven’t any of any consequence.
We have the saint vitus’ dance, and cannot possibly keep our heads still.
As if the rest of mankind had stood his sentinels.
After a night’s sleep the news is as indispensable as the breakfast.
For my part, i could easily do without the post office.
I think that there are very few important communications made through it.
And i am sure that i never read any memorable news in a newspaper.
Yet not a few are greedy after this gossip.
How much more important to know what that is which was never old!
Kieou he yu sent a man to khoung tseu to know his news.
The messenger being gone, the philosopher remarked what a worthy messenger!
Shams and delusions are esteemed for soundest truths, while reality is fabulous.
This is always exhilarating and sublime.
We think that that is which appears to be.
In eternity there is indeed something true and sublime.
But all these times and places and occasions are now and here.
Let us spend our lives in conceiving then.
Why should we knock under and go with the stream?
If the engine whistles, let it whistle till it is hoarse for its pains.
If the bell rings, why should we run?
We will consider what kind of music they are like.
Be it life or death, we crave only reality.
Time is but the stream i go a fishing in.
Its thin current slides away, but eternity remains.
I would drink deeper fish in the sky, whose bottom is pebbly with stars.
I know not the first letter of the alphabet.
I do not wish to be any more busy with my hands than is necessary.
My head is hands and feet.
I feel all my best faculties concentrated in it.
Yet i sustained myself by the prospect of such reading in future.
For what are the classics but the noblest recorded thoughts of man?
We might as well omit to study nature because she is old.
Books must be read as deliberately and reservedly as they were written.
There are the stars, and they who can may read them.
The astronomers forever comment on and observe them.
They are not exhalations like our daily colloquies and vaporous breath.
A written word is the choicest of relics.
It is the work of art nearest to life itself.
The symbol of an ancient man’s thought becomes a modern man’s speech.
They only talk of forgetting them who never knew them.
By such a pile we may hope to scale heaven at last.
How he did get down again!
The best books are not read even by those who are called good readers.
What does our concord culture amount to?
Most men do not know that any nation but the hebrews have had a scripture.
Or shall i hear the name of plato and never read his book?
But how actually is it?
It is not all books that are as dull as their readers.
The book exists for us perchance which will explain our miracles and reveal new ones.
The at present unutterable things we may find somewhere uttered.
Moreover, with wisdom we shall learn liberality.
But consider how little this village does for its own culture.
We need to be provoked, goaded like oxen, as we are, into a trot.
Shall the world be confined to one paris or one oxford forever?
Cannot students be boarded here and get a liberal education under the skies of concord?
Can we not hire some abelard to lecture to us?
It should be the patron of the fine arts.
It wants only the magnanimity and refinement.
Why should our life be in any respect provincial?
Why should we leave it to harper brothers and redding co. to select our reading?
That is the uncommon school we want.
Instead of noblemen, let us have noble villages of men.
Much is published, but little printed.
No method nor discipline can supersede the necessity of being forever on the alert.
Will you be a reader, a student merely, or a seer?
Read your fate, see what is before you, and walk on into futurity.
I did not read books the first summer i hoed beans.
Nay, i often did better than this.
I love a broad margin to my life.
I realized what the orientals mean by contemplation and the forsaking of works.
For the most part, i minded not how the hours went.
Instead of singing like the birds, i silently smiled at my incessant good fortune.
A man must find his occasions in himself, it is true.
The natural day is very calm, and will hardly reprove his indolence.
It was a drama of many scenes and without an end.
Housework was a pleasant pastime.
They seemed glad to get out themselves, and as if unwilling to be brought in.
I was sometimes tempted to stretch an awning over them and take my seat there.
I tasted them out of compliment to nature, though they were scarcely palatable.
Its broad pinnate tropical leaf was pleasant though strange to look on.
The fitchburg railroad touches the pond about a hundred rods south of where i dwell.
I too would fain be a track repairer somewhere in the orbit of the earth.
Here come your groceries, country your rations, countrymen!
And here’s your pay for them!
With such huge and lumbering civility the country hands a chair to the city.
If the enterprise were as innocent as it is early!
If the enterprise were as heroic and commanding as it is protracted and unwearied!
The startings and arrivals of the cars are now the epochs in the village day.
Have not men improved somewhat in punctuality since the railroad was invented?
There is something electrifying in the atmosphere of the former place.
We have constructed a fate, an atropos , that never turns aside.
We live the steadier for it.
We are all educated thus to be sons of tell.
The air is full of invisible bolts.
Every path but your own is the path of fate.
Keep on your own track, then.
What recommends commerce to me is its enterprise and bravery.
It does not clasp its hands and pray to jupiter.
Commerce is unexpectedly confident and serene, alert, adventurous, and unwearied.
They are proof sheets which need no correction.
It is advertised in the cuttingsville times.
While these things go up other things come down.
But their dogs, where are they?
They will not be in at the death.
Their vocation, too, is gone.
Their fidelity and sagacity are below par now.
So is your pastoral life whirled past and away.
I never go to see where it ends.
I had a rare opportunity to become acquainted with their habits.
Their dismal scream is truly ben jonsonian.
Oh o o o o that i never had been bor r r r n!
Then that i never had been bor r r r n!
Echoes another on the farther side with tremulous sincerity, and bor r r r n!
Comes faintly from far in the lincoln woods.
I was also serenaded by a hooting owl.
It reminded me of ghouls and idiots and insane howlings.
I rejoice that there are owls.
Let them do the idiotic and maniacal hooting for men.
They represent the stark twilight and unsatisfied thoughts which all have.
It would put nations on the alert.
All climates agree with brave chanticleer.
He is more indigenous even than the natives.
His health is ever good, his lungs are sound, his spirits never flag.
An old fashioned man would have lost his senses or died of ennui before this.
Not even a lark or an oriole, those mild plantation birds, ever visited my clearing.
No cockerels to crow nor hens to cackle in the yard.
But unfenced nature reaching up to your very sills.
I go and come with a strange liberty in nature, a part of herself.
The repose is never complete.
They are nature’s watchmen, links which connect the days of animated life.
There is commonly sufficient space about us.
Our horizon is never quite at our elbows.
It is as much asia or africa as new england.
Nothing can rightly compel a simple and brave man to a vulgar sadness.
I do not flatter myself, but if it be possible they flatter me.
To be alone was something unpleasant.
Every little pine needle expanded and swelled with sympathy and befriended me.
Why should i feel lonely?
Is not our planet in the milky way?
This which you put seems to me not to be the most important question.
What do we want most to dwell near to?
For the most part we allow only outlying and transient circumstances to make our occasions.
They are, in fact, the cause of our distraction.
Nearest to all things is that power which fashions their being.
Next to us the grandest laws are continually being executed.
It is an ocean of subtile intelligences.
We are the subjects of an experiment which is not a little interesting to me.
With thinking we may be beside ourselves in a sane sense.
We are not wholly involved in nature.
This doubleness may easily make us poor neighbors and friends sometimes.
I find it wholesome to be alone the greater part of the time.
To be in company, even with the best, is soon wearisome and dissipating.
I love to be alone.
I never found the companion that was so companionable as solitude.
A man thinking or working is always alone, let him be where he will.
Society is commonly too cheap.
Certainly less frequency would suffice for all important and hearty communications.
Consider the girls in a factory, never alone, hardly in their dreams.
What company has that lonely lake, i pray?
Shall i not have intelligence with the earth?
Am i not partly leaves and vegetable mould myself?
What is the pill which will keep us well, serene, contented?
It is surprising how many great men and women a small house will contain.
Also, our sentences wanted room to unfold and form their columns in the interval.
You need not rest your reputation on the dinners you give.
I think i shall never revisit those scenes.
The most ate of them.
As for men, they will hardly fail one any where.
I met several there under more favorable circumstances than i could any where else.
But fewer came to see me on trivial business.
In this respect, my company was winnowed by my mere distance from town.
Why are you in tears, patroclus, like a young girl?
Or have you alone heard some news from phthia?
I suppose there’s no harm in going after such a thing to day, says he.
A more simple and natural man it would be hard to find.
He wore a flat gray cloth cap, a dingy wool colored greatcoat, and cowhide boots.
He wasn’t a going to hurt himself.
He didn’t care if he only earned his board.
He would say, as he went by in the morning, how thick the pigeons are!
I could get all i should want for a week in one day.
He was a skilful chopper, and indulged in some flourishes and ornaments in his art.
His mirth was without alloy.
Looking round upon the trees he would exclaim, by george!
I can enjoy myself well enough here chopping i want no better sport.
In him the animal man chiefly was developed.
In physical endurance and contentment he was cousin to the pine and the rock.
He had got to find him out as you did.
He would not play any part.
Wiser men were demigods to him.
He never heard the sound of praise.
He particularly reverenced the writer and the preacher.
I asked him if he ever wished to write his thoughts.
It would have suggested many things to a philosopher to have dealings with him.
He had never heard of such things before.
Could he do without factories?
He had worn the home made vermont gray, he said, and that was good.
Could he dispense with tea and coffee?
Did this country afford any beverage beside water?
He would sometimes exclaim, how i love to talk!
By george, i could talk all day!
He would sometimes ask me first on such occasions, if i had made any improvement.
Said he some men are satisfied with one thing, and some with another.
Yet he thoroughly believed in honesty and the like virtues.
It was the lord’s will, i suppose.
And there he was to prove the truth of his words.
He was a metaphysical puzzle to me.
And, true enough, in proportion as he appeared to humble himself was he exalted.
I did not know at first but it was the result of a wise policy.
Objects of charity are not guests.
Men of almost every degree of wit called on me in the migrating season.
One real runaway slave, among the rest, whom i helped to forward toward the northstar.
I have too good a memory to make that necessary.
I could not but notice some of the peculiarities of my visitors.
Girls and boys and young women generally seemed glad to be in the woods.
They looked in the pond and at the flowers, and improved their time.
A man sits as many risks as he runs.
I had more cheering visitors than the last.
For i had had communication with that race.
I came to love my rows, my beans, though so many more than i wanted.
They attached me to the earth, and so i got strength like antæus.
But why should i raise them?
What shall i learn of beans or beans of me?
It is a fine broad leaf to look on.
My enemies are worms, cool days, and most of all woodchucks.
The last have nibbled for me a quarter of an acre clean.
And now to night my flute has waked the echoes over that very water.
But soon my homestead was out of their sight and thought.
Corn, my boy, for fodder corn for fodder.
This was one field not in mr. coleman’s report.
But this was not corn, and so it was safe from such enemies as he.
It was a cheap sort of top dressing in which i had entire faith.
And looked round for a woodchuck or a skunk to exercise my chivalry upon.
I was determined to know beans.
I harvested twelve bushels of beans.
This is the result of my experience in raising beans.
First look out for worms, and supply vacancies by planting anew.
This further experience also i gained.
Commonly men will only be brave as their fathers were brave, or timid.
We should never stand upon ceremony with sincerity.
We should not meet thus in haste.
It is the premium and the feast which tempt him.
He sacrifices not to ceres and the terrestrial jove, but to the infernal plutus rather.
He knows nature but as a robber.
In his view the earth is all equally cultivated like a garden.
These beans have results which are not harvested by me.
Do they not grow for woodchucks partly?
How, then, can our harvest fail?
It matters little comparatively whether the fields fill the farmer’s barns.
I went there frequently to observe their habits.
They, being commonly out of doors, heard whatever was in the wind.
I had many a genial thought by the cabin fire as i sailed.
It is darker in the woods, even in common nights, than most suppose.
By night, of course, the perplexity is infinitely greater.
I had gone down to the woods for other purposes.
I was never molested by any person but those who represented the state.
The pope’s homers would soon get properly distributed.
Nec bella fuerunt, faginus astabat dum scyphus ante dapes.
Nor wars did men molest, when only beechen bowls were in request.
You who govern public affairs, what need have you to employ punishments?
Love virtue, and the people will be virtuous.
There is but one way to obtain it, yet few take that way.
If you would know the flavor of huckleberries, ask the cow boy or the partridge.
Through this, whistling a tune, we took our way to the haunts of men again.
But now i had made my home by the shore.
Thus i caught two fishes as it were with one hook.
The first depends more on the light, and follows the sky.
In stormy weather they are sometimes of a dark slate color.
Some consider blue to be the color of pure water, whether liquid or solid.
Lying between the earth and the heavens, it partakes of the color of both.
Some think it is bottomless.
Who knows in how many unremembered nations’ literatures this has been the castalian fountain?
Or what nymphs presided over it in the golden age?
It is a gem of the first water which concord wears in her coronet.
The snow reprints it, as it were, in clear white type alto relievo.
This same summer the pond has begun to fall again.
The same is true, as far as my observation goes, of white pond.
These are the lips of the lake on which no beard grows.
It licks its chaps from time to time.
Some have been puzzled to tell how the shore became so regularly paved.
The pond was my well ready dug.
Nevertheless, this pond is not very fertile in fish.
Its pickerel, though not abundant, are its chief boast.
The specific name reticulatus would not apply to this it should be guttatus rather.
These are all very firm fish, and weigh more than their size promises.
Probably many ichthyologists would make new varieties of some of them.
At most, it tolerates one annual loon.
These are all the animals of consequence which frequent it now.
Perhaps they are the nests of the chivin.
These lend a pleasing mystery to the bottom.
The shore is irregular enough not to be monotonous.
There are few traces of man’s hand to be seen.
The water laves the shore as it did a thousand years ago.
A lake is the landscape’s most beautiful and expressive feature.
Indeed, they sometimes dive below this line, as it were by mistake, and are undeceived.
The thrills of joy and thrills of pain are undistinguishable.
How peaceful the phenomena of the lake!
Again the works of man shine as in the spring.
Nations come and go without defiling it.
A field of water betrays the spirit that is in the air.
It is continually receiving new life and motion from above.
It is intermediate in its nature between land and sky.
I see where the breeze dashes across it by the streaks or flakes of light.
It is remarkable that we can look down on its surface.
He did not know whose it was it belonged to the pond.
My muse may be excused if she is silent henceforth.
How can you expect the birds to sing when their groves are cut down?
To earn their walden by the turning of a cock or drawing of a plug!
Many men have been likened to it, but few deserve that honor.
It has not acquired one permanent wrinkle after all its ripples.
It is the work of a brave man surely, in whom there was no guile!
Though seen but once, it helps to wash out state street and the engine’s soot.
One proposes that it be called god’s drop.
A walk through the woods thither was often my recreation.
They are either solid grass, or have a little sand in the middle.
They preserve their form when dry for an indefinite period.
Such is the poverty of our nomenclature.
Give me the poverty that enjoys true wealth.
Farmers are respectable and interesting to me in proportion as they are poor, poor farmers.
A great grease spot, redolent of manures and buttermilk!
Under a high state of cultivation, being manured with the hearts and brains of men!
As if you were to raise your potatoes in the church yard!
Such is a model farm.
This is my lake country.
In these as in other respects, however, it is a lesser twin of walden.
They are so much alike that you would say they must be connected under ground.
It has the same stony shore, and its waters are of the same hue.
One who frequents it proposes to call it virid lake.
Perhaps it might be called yellow pine lake, from the following circumstance.
He had some of it in his shed then.
There were marks of an axe and of woodpeckers on the butt.
His father, eighty years old, could not remember when it was not there.
They are too pure to have a market value they contain no muck.
We never learned meanness of them.
How much fairer than the pool before the farmer’s door, in which his ducks swim!
Hither the clean wild ducks come.
Nature has no human inhabitant who appreciates her.
She flourishes most alone, far from the towns where they reside.
These were the shrines i visited both summer and winter.
If it had lasted longer it might have tinged my employments and life.
Beside, he tells us that he showed it to very few.
But are they not indeed distinguished who are conscious that they are regarded at all?
I thought of living there before i went to walden.
I hooked the apples, leaped the brook, and scared the musquash and the trout.
They stood and looked in my eye or pecked at my shoe significantly.
But they fight at an overwhelming disadvantage, living, john field, alas!
Without arithmetic, and failing so.
I catch shiners with fish worms, and bait the perch with them.
Are shallows and quicksands, and rope broken withal, and bucket irrecoverable.
I am not squeamish in such cases when manners are concerned.
Remember thy creator in the days of thy youth.
Rise free from care before the dawn, and seek adventures.
There are no larger fields than these, no worthier games than may here be played.
Let the thunder rumble what if it threaten ruin to farmers’ crops?
That is not its errand to thee.
Take shelter under the cloud, while they flee to carts and sheds.
Let not to get a living be thy trade, but thy sport.
Enjoy the land, but own it not.
Landscape where the richest element is a little sunshine innocent.
No one runs to revel on thy rail fenced lea.
It is good bait sometimes, i allow.
The wildest scenes had become unaccountably familiar.
I love the wild not less than the good.
The wildness and adventure that are in fishing still recommended it to me.
She is not afraid to exhibit herself to them.
No wonder, then, that he did not oftener stay to play on the common.
I have actually fished from the same kind of necessity that the first fishers did.
I did not pity the fishes nor the worms.
The hare in its extremity cries like a child.
The mass of men are still and always young in this respect.
In some countries a hunting parson is no uncommon sight.
Yet even they expect to go to heaven at last.
Thus, even in civilized communities, the embryo man passes through the hunter stage of development.
I have tried it again and again.
I think that i do not mistake.
It is a faint intimation, yet so are the first streaks of morning.
It was insignificant and unnecessary, and cost more than it came to.
The repugnance to animal food is not the effect of experience, but is an instinct.
The voracious caterpillar when transformed into a butterfly, .
The abdomen under the wings of the butterfly still represents the larva.
This is the tid bit which tempts his insectivorous fate.
Yet perhaps this may be done.
But put an extra condiment into your dish, and it will poison you.
It is not worth the while to live by rich cookery.
This certainly suggests what change is to be made.
I am satisfied that it is not.
Is it not a reproach that man is a carnivorous animal?
No man ever followed his genius till it misled him.
All nature is your congratulation, and you have cause momentarily to bless yourself.
The greatest gains and values are farthest from being appreciated.
We easily come to doubt if they exist.
They are the highest reality.
Perhaps the facts most astounding and most real are never communicated by man to man.
I would fain keep sober always and there are infinite degrees of drunkenness.
Ah, how low i fall when i am tempted by them!
Even music may be intoxicating.
Such apparently slight causes destroyed greece and rome, and will destroy england and america.
Of all ebriosity, who does not prefer to be intoxicated by the air he breathes?
Perhaps these questions are entertained only in youth, as most believe of poetry.
My practice is nowhere, my opinion is here.
He goes to the mill pond, she to her preserve pot.
Our whole life is startlingly moral.
There is never an instant’s truce between virtue and vice.
Goodness is the only investment that never fails.
We cannot touch a string or move a stop but the charming moral transfixes us.
Possibly we may withdraw from it, but never change its nature.
This creature succeeded by other means than temperance and purity.
Who knows what sort of life would result if we had attained to purity?
Man flows at once to god when the channel of purity is open.
By turns our purity inspires and our impurity casts us down.
How happy’s he who hath due place assigned to his beasts and disafforested his mind!
All sensuality is one, though it takes many forms all purity is one.
It is the same whether a man eat, or drink, or cohabit, or sleep sensually.
The impure can neither stand nor sit with purity.
If you would be chaste, you must be temperate.
How shall a man know if he is chaste?
He shall not know it.
We have heard of this virtue, but we know not what it is.
We speak conformably to the rumor which we have heard.
From exertion come wisdom and purity from sloth ignorance and sensuality.
In the student sensuality is a sluggish habit of mind.
Nature is hard to be overcome, but she must be overcome.
We discourse freely without shame of one form of sensuality, and are silent about another.
Having bathed, he sat down to re create his intellectual man.
It was a rather cool evening, and some of his neighbors were apprehending a frost.
It was no more than the scurf of his skin, which was constantly shuffled off.
Those same stars twinkle over other fields than these.
But how to come out of this condition and actually migrate thither?
I wonder what the world is doing now.
The pigeons are all asleep upon their roosts, no flutter from them.
Was that a farmer’s noon horn which sounded from beyond the woods just now?
The hands are coming in to boiled salt beef and cider and indian bread.
Why will men worry themselves so?
He that does not eat need not work.
I wonder how much they have reaped.
Who would live there where a body can never think for the barking of bose?
To keep bright the devil’s door knobs, and scour his tubs this bright day!
Better not keep a house.
Say, some hollow tree and then for morning calls and dinner parties!
I hear a rustling of the leaves.
Is it some ill fed village hound yielding to the instinct of the chase?
It comes on apace my sumachs and sweet briers tremble.
How do you like the world to day?
See those clouds how they hang!
That’s the greatest thing i have seen to day.
That’s a true mediterranean sky.
That’s the true industry for poets.
It is the only trade i have learned.
My brown bread will soon be gone.
I will go with you gladly soon, but i am just concluding a serious meditation.
I think that i am near the end of it.
Leave me alone, then, for a while.
But that we may not be delayed, you shall be digging the bait meanwhile.
Let me see where was i?
Shall i go to heaven or a fishing?
I fear my thoughts will not come back to me.
If it would do any good, i would whistle for them.
My thoughts have left no track, and i cannot find the path again.
What was it that i was thinking of?
It was a very hazy day.
I know not whether it was the dumps or a budding ecstasy.
There never is but one opportunity of a kind.
How now, hermit, is it too soon?
Well, then, let’s be off.
Shall we to the concord?
There’s good sport there if the water be not too high.
Why do precisely these objects which we behold make a world?
I sent one to a distinguished naturalist, and it interested him much.
The remarkably adult yet innocent expression of their open and serene eyes is very memorable.
All intelligence seems reflected in them.
They suggest not merely the purity of infancy, but a wisdom clarified by experience.
The woods do not yield another such a gem.
The traveller does not often look into such a limpid well.
These were my hens and chickens.
How retired the otter manages to live here!
I was witness to events of a less peaceful character.
They fought with more pertinacity than bull dogs.
Neither manifested the least disposition to retreat.
It was evident that their battle cry was conquer or die.
I was myself excited somewhat even as if they had been men.
The more you think of it, the less the difference.
For numbers and for carnage it was an austerlitz or dresden.
Two killed on the patriots’ side, and luther blanchard wounded!
Why here every ant was a buttrick, fire!
And thousands shared the fate of davis and hosmer.
There was not one hireling there.
This event happened previous to the expulsion of the tyrant christiern the second from sweden.
They gave me a pair of her wings, which i keep still.
There is no appearance of a membrane about them.
But they were too often successful.
But i was more than a match for him on the surface.
He commonly went off in a rain.
Did not his white breast enough betray him?
He was indeed a silly loon, i thought.
I concluded that he laughed in derision of my efforts, confident of his own resources.
When chestnuts were ripe i laid up half a bushel for winter.
Occasionally i climbed and shook the trees.
These nuts, as far as they went, were a good substitute for bread.
Many other substitutes might, perhaps, be found.
Cultivation has well nigh exterminated it.
Ah, many a tale their color told!
When i came to build my chimney i studied masonry.
I lingered most about the fireplace, as the most vital part of the house.
He shared with me the labors of cooking.
This was toward the end of summer.
The dinner even is only the parable of a dinner, commonly.
Nevertheless, it stood through a great many hasty puddings.
I did not plaster till it was freezing weather.
But these within the ice are not so numerous nor obvious as those beneath.
These are the little air guns which contribute to make the ice crack and whoop.
I sacrificed it to vulcan, for it was past serving the god terminus.
His bread and meat are sweet.
There was also the drift wood of the pond.
This i hauled up partly on the shore.
After all our discoveries and inventions no man will go by a pile of wood.
It is as precious to us as it was to our saxon and norman ancestors.
If they made their bows of it, we make our gun stocks of it.
Neither could i do without them.
Every man looks at his wood pile with a kind of affection.
If it was dull, it was at least hung true.
A few pieces of fat pine were a great treasure.
Once in a while i got a little of this.
My house was not empty though i was gone.
It was as if i had left a cheerful housekeeper behind.
It was i and fire that lived there and commonly my housekeeper proved trustworthy.
You can always see a face in the fire.
Never, bright flame, may be denied to me thy dear, life imaging, close sympathy.
What but my hopes shot upward e’er so bright?
What but my fortunes sunk so low in night?
Was thy existence then too fanciful for our life’s common light, who are so dull?
Did thy bright gleam mysterious converse hold with our congenial souls?
For human society i was obliged to conjure up the former occupants of these woods.
Some say that he was a guinea negro.
He too, however, occupies an equally narrow house at present.
She led a hard life, and somewhat inhumane.
I have seen bricks amid the oak copse there.
Breed’s hut was standing only a dozen years ago, though it had long been unoccupied.
It was about the size of mine.
It fairly overcame my nervii.
It’s baker’s barn, cried one.
It is the codman place, affirmed another.
The very nearness of the fire but cooled our ardor.
We finally retreated without doing any mischief, returned to sleep and gondibert.
The house being gone, he looked at what there was left.
But to return toward lincoln.
Rumor said that he had been a soldier at waterloo.
If he had lived i should have made him fight his battles over again.
His trade here was that of a ditcher.
Napoleon went to st. helena quoil came to walden woods.
All i know of him is tragic.
His pipe lay broken on the hearth, instead of a bowl broken at the fountain.
What a sorrowful act must that be, the covering up of wells!
Coincident with the opening of wells of tears.
I mark its still tender, civil, cheerful, lilac colors.
Were there no natural advantages, no water privileges, forsooth?
They were universally a thirsty race.
The sterile soil would at least have been proof against a low land degeneracy.
How little does the memory of these human inhabitants enhance the beauty of the landscape!
With such reminiscences i repeopled the woods and lulled myself asleep.
At this season i seldom had a visitor.
How cheerful it is to hear of!
Nor was it much better by the carriage road from brister’s hill.
Who can predict his comings and goings?
His business calls him out at all hours, even when doctors sleep.
Broadway was still and deserted in comparison.
I think that he must be the man of the most faith of any alive.
He has no venture in the present.
How blind that cannot see serenity!
A true friend of man almost the only friend of human progress.
Enter ye that have leisure and a quiet mind, who earnestly seek the right road.
A blue robed man, whose fittest roof is the overarching sky which reflects his serenity.
I do not see how he can ever die nature cannot spare him.
To converse with whom was a new england night’s entertainment.
There too, as every where, i sometimes expected the visitor who never comes.
Boo hoo, boo hoo, boo hoo!
It was one of the most thrilling discords i ever heard.
In the twilight and the night the rabbits came regularly and made a hearty meal.
I am glad that the partridge gets fed, at any rate.
It is nature’s own bird which lives on buds and diet drink.
Ere long the hounds arrived, but here they lost the scent.
He had lost a dog, but found a man.
The fox rolling over the rock lay dead on the ground.
The hunter still kept his place and listened to the hounds.
Then the hunter came forward and stood in their midst, and the mystery was solved.
Credit is given for deer skins also, and they were daily sold.
The hunters were formerly a numerous and merry crew here.
Squirrels and wild mice disputed for my store of nuts.
The hares were very familiar.
Near at hand they only excited my pity.
Its large eyes appeared young and unhealthy, almost dropsical.
Not without reason was its slenderness.
Such then was its nature.
What is a country without rabbits and partridges?
I awoke to an answered question, to nature and daylight.
Nature puts no question and answers none which we mortals ask.
She has long ago taken her resolution.
Then to my morning work.
After a cold and snowy night it needed a divining rod to find it.
Heaven is under our feet as well as over our heads.
The things which they practise are said not yet to be known.
Here is one fishing for pickerel with grown perch for bait.
How, pray, did he get these in mid winter?
He gets his living by barking trees.
Ah, the pickerel of walden!
I have visited two such bottomless ponds in one walk in this neighborhood.
Many have believed that walden reached quite through to the other side of the globe.
What if all ponds were shallow?
Would it not react on the minds of men?
I am thankful that this pond was made deep and pure for a symbol.
While men believe in the infinite some ponds will be thought to be bottomless.
Most ponds, emptied, would leave a meadow no more hollow than we frequently see.
So much for the increased horrors of the chasm of loch fyne when emptied.
Every harbor on the sea coast, also, has its bar at its entrance.
Even when cleft or bored through it is not comprehended in its entireness.
What i have observed of the pond is no less true in ethics.
It is well known that a level cannot be used on ice.
It was probably greater in the middle.
When so many things are not provided for.
It looks like solidified azure, as, far off, it is drawn through the streets.
Thus the pond recovered the greater part.
Ice is an interesting subject for contemplation.
It is commonly said that this is the difference between the affections and the intellect.
I lay down the book and go to my well for water, and lo!
The pure walden water is mingled with the sacred water of the ganges.
In mid winter the middle had been the warmest and the ice thinnest there.
The day is an epitome of the year.
The cracking and booming of the ice indicate a change of temperature.
The earth is all alive and covered with papillæ.
One year i went across the middle only five days before it disappeared entirely.
So the alligator comes out of the mud with quakings of the earth.
What makes this sand foliage remarkable is its springing into existence thus suddenly.
You find thus in the very sands an anticipation of the vegetable leaf.
The atoms have already learned this law, and are pregnant by it.
The overhanging leaf sees here its prototype.
The feathers and wings of birds are still drier and thinner leaves.
The very globe continually transcends and translates itself, and becomes winged in its orbit.
You here see perchance how blood vessels are formed.
Such are the sources of rivers.
The ball of the human finger is but a drop congealed.
The fingers and toes flow to their extent from the thawing mass of the body.
The nose is a manifest congealed drop or stalactite.
The chin is a still larger drop, the confluent dripping of the face.
The maker of this earth but patented a leaf.
This phenomenon is more exhilarating to me than the luxuriance and fertility of vineyards.
This is the frost coming out of the ground this is spring.
It precedes the green and flowery spring, as mythology precedes regular poetry.
I know of nothing more purgative of winter fumes and indigestions.
Fresh curls spring from the baldest brow.
Its throes will heave our exuviæ from their graves.
Thaw with his gentle persuasion is more powerful than thor with his hammer.
The one melts, the other but breaks in pieces.
It is an antique style older than greek or egyptian.
Many of the phenomena of winter are suggestive of an inexpressible tenderness and fragile delicacy.
No you don’t chickaree chickaree.
The first sparrow of spring!
The year beginning with younger hope than ever!
What at such a time are histories, chronologies, traditions, and all written revelations?
The brooks sing carols and glees to the spring.
It grows as steadily as the rill oozes out of the ground.
He too is helping to crack it.
Such is the contrast between winter and spring.
Walden was dead and is alive again.
But this spring it broke up more steadily, as i have said.
It is seemingly instantaneous at last.
I looked out the window, and lo!
O the evening robin, at the end of a new england summer day!
If i could ever find the twig he sits upon!
I mean he i mean the twig .
This at least is not the turdus migratorius .
I knew that it would not rain any more.
Eurus ad auroram nabathæaque regna recessit, persidaque, et radiis juga subdita matutinis.
A single gentle rain makes the grass many shades greener.
So our prospects brighten on the influx of better thoughts.
We loiter in winter while it is already spring.
In a pleasant spring morning all men’s sins are forgiven.
Such a day is a truce to vice.
While such a sun holds out to burn, the vilest sinner may return.
Through our own recovered innocence we discern the innocence of our neighbors.
Even he has entered into the joy of his lord.
Are those the true and natural sentiments of man?
It was the most ethereal flight i had ever witnessed.
It was not lonely, but made all the earth lonely beneath it.
Where was the parent which hatched it, its kindred, and its father in the heavens?
Its eyry now some cliffy cloud.
There needs no stronger proof of immortality.
All things must live in such a light.
O death, where was thy sting?
O grave, where was thy victory, then?
The impression made on a wise man is that of universal innocence.
Poison is not poisonous after all, nor are any wounds fatal.
Compassion is a very untenable ground.
Its pleadings will not bear to be stereotyped.
I had heard the wood thrush long before.
This is the sulphur showers we hear of.
Conclusion to the sick the doctors wisely recommend a change of air and scenery.
Thank heaven, here is not all the world.
The universe is wider than our views of it.
The other side of the globe is but the home of our correspondent.
How long, pray, would a man hunt giraffes if he could?
Travel them, and be expert in home cosmography.
What does africa, what does the west stand for?
Is not our own interior white on the chart?
Black though it may prove, like the coast, when discovered.
Are these the problems which most concern mankind?
Does mr. grinnell know where he himself is?
Were preserved meats invented to preserve meat merely?
Patriotism is a maggot in their heads.
Erret, et extremos alter scrutetur iberos.
Plus habet hic vitæ, plus habet ille viæ.
Let them wander and scrutinize the outlandish australians.
I have more of god, they more of the road.
Herein are demanded the eye and the nerve.
Only the defeated and deserters go to the wars, cowards that run away and enlist.
This was manly, as the world goes and yet it was idle, if not desperate.
I left the woods for as good a reason as i went there.
I do not wish to go below now.
Now put the foundations under them.
Neither men nor toad stools grow so.
As if that were important, and there were not enough to understand you without them.
As if there were safety in stupidity alone.
It depends on how you are yarded.
The volatile truth of our words should continually betray the inadequacy of the residual statement.
Their truth is instantly translated its literal monument alone remains.
Why level downward to our dullest perception always, and praise that as common sense?
The commonest sense is the sense of men asleep, which they express by snoring.
Some would find fault with the morning red, if they ever got up early enough.
But what is that to the purpose?
Let every one mind his own business, and endeavor to be what he was made.
Why should we be in such desperate haste to succeed, and in such desperate enterprises?
Let him step to the music which he hears, however measured or far away.
Shall he turn his spring into summer?
We will not be shipwrecked on a vain reality.
One day it came into his mind to make a staff.
But why do i stay to mention these things?
For the most part, we are not where we are, but in a false position.
In sane moments we regard only the facts, the case that is.
Say what you have to say, not what you ought.
Any truth is better than make believe.
His companion’s prayer is forgotten.
It is not so bad as you are.
It looks poorest when you are richest.
The fault finder will find faults even in paradise.
Love your life, poor as it is.
You may perhaps have some pleasant, thrilling, glorious hours, even in a poor house.
The town’s poor seem to me often to live the most independent lives of any.
May be they are simply great enough to receive without misgiving.
Cultivate poverty like a garden herb, like sage.
Do not trouble yourself much to get new things, whether clothes or friends.
Turn the old return to them.
Things do not change we change.
Sell your clothes and keep your thoughts.
God will see that you do not want society.
Humility like darkness reveals the heavenly lights.
The shadows of poverty and meanness gather around us, and lo!
Creation widens to our view.
It is life near the bone where it is sweetest.
You are defended from being a trifler.
No man loses ever on a lower level by magnanimity on a higher.
Superfluous wealth can buy superfluities only.
Money is not required to buy one necessary of the soul.
It is the noise of my contemporaries.
They tell me of california and texas, of england and the indies, of the hon.
They are all on a committee of arrangements, and hourly expect a speech from somebody.
God is only the president of the day, and webster is his orator.
Let us not play at kittly benders.
There is a solid bottom every where.
The boy replied that it had.
Only what is thought, said, or done at a certain rare coincidence is good.
Give me a hammer, and let me feel for the furring.
Do not depend on the putty.
So will help you god, and so only.
Rather than love, than money, than fame, give me truth.
The hospitality was as cold as the ices.
I thought that there was no need of ice to freeze them.
The style, the house and grounds and entertainment pass for nothing with me.
There was a man in my neighborhood who lived in a hollow tree.
His manners were truly regal.
I should have done better had i called on him.
Consider the china pride and stagnant self complacency of mankind.
There are the records of the philosophical societies, and the public eulogies of great men!
It is the good adam contemplating his own virtue.
The learned societies and great men of assyria, where are they?
What youthful philosophers and experimentalists we are!
There is not one of my readers who has yet lived a whole human life.
These may be but the spring months in the life of the race.
We are acquainted with a mere pellicle of the globe on which we live.
Most have not delved six feet beneath the surface, nor leaped as many above it.
We know not where we are.
Beside, we are sound asleep nearly half our time.
Yet we esteem ourselves wise, and have an established order on the surface.
Truly, we are deep thinkers, we are ambitious spirits!
We think that we can change our clothes only.
Who knows what sort of seventeen year locust will next come out of the ground?
The life in us is like the water in the river.
The light which puts out our eyes is darkness to us.
Only that day dawns to which we are awake.
There is more day to dawn.
The standing army is only an arm of the standing government.
It does not keep the country free.
It does not settle the west.
In which majorities decide only those questions to which the rule of expediency is applicable?
Why has every man a conscience, then?
I think that we should be men first, and subjects afterward.
Or small movable forts and magazines, at the service of some unscrupulous man in power?
Such command no more respect than men of straw, or a lump of dirt.
They have the same sort of worth only as horses and dogs.
Yet such as these even are commonly esteemed good citizens.
How does it become a man to behave toward the american government today?
I answer that he cannot without disgrace be associated with it.
But almost all say that such is not the case now.
At any rate, it is a great evil to make a stir about it.
Of this, he says, every man shall judge for himself.
This, according to paley, would be inconvenient.
But he that would save his life, in such a case, shall lose it.
What is the price current of an honest man and patriot today?
The character of the voters is not staked.
I am willing to leave it to the majority.
Its obligation, therefore, never exceeds that of expediency.
Even voting for the right is doing nothing for it.
It is only expressing to men feebly your desire that it should prevail.
There is but little virtue in the action of masses of men.
They will then be the only slaves.
Can we not count upon some independent votes?
Are there not many individuals in the country who do not attend conventions?
Our statistics are at fault the population has been returned too large.
How many men are there to a square thousand miles in the country?
Does not america offer any inducement for men to settle here?
I must get off him first, that he may pursue his contemplations too.
See what gross inconsistency is tolerated.
The broadest and most prevalent error requires the most disinterested virtue to sustain it.
How can a man be satisfied to entertain an opinion merely, and enjoy it?
Is there any enjoyment in it, if his opinion is that he is aggrieved?
They think that, if they should resist, the remedy would be worse than the evil.
Why does it not cherish its wise minority?
Why does it cry and resist before it is hurt?
They take too much time, and a man’s life will be gone.
I have other affairs to attend to.
So is all change for the better, like birth and death which convulse the body.
Moreover, any man more right than his neighbors constitutes a majority of one already.
But we love better to talk about it that we say is our mission.
Reform keeps many scores of newspapers in its service, but not one man.
This is, in fact, the definition of a peaceable revolution, if any such is possible.
My answer is, if you really wish to do any thing, resign your office.
But even suppose blood should flow.
Is there not a sort of blood shed when the conscience is wounded?
I see this blood flowing now.
Thus his moral ground is taken from under his feet.
Christ answered the herodians according to their condition.
I should feel as if i were worth less in that case.
Pay it, it said, or be locked up in the jail.
But, unfortunately, another man saw fit to pay it.
This i gave to the town clerk and he has it.
I have paid no poll tax for six years.
I felt as if i alone of all my townsmen had paid my tax.
It is not armed with superior wit or honesty, but with superior physical strength.
I was not born to be forced.
I will breathe after my own fashion.
Let us see who is the strongest.
What force has a multitude?
They only can force me who obey a higher law than i.
They force me to become like themselves.
What sort of life were that to live?
It must help itself do as i do.
It is not worth the while to snivel about it.
I am not responsible for the successful working of the machinery of society.
I am not the son of the engineer.
If a plant cannot live according to its nature, it dies and so a man.
The night in prison was novel and interesting enough.
Why, said he, they accuse me of burning a barn but i never did it.
They were the voices of old burghers that i heard in the streets.
It was a closer view of my native town.
I was fairly inside of it.
I never had seen its institutions before.
This is one of its peculiar institutions for it is a shire town.
I began to comprehend what its inhabitants were about.
I saw yet more distinctly the state in which i lived.
This is the whole history of my prisons.
This, then, is my position at present.
Let him see that he does only what belongs to himself and to the hour.
You do not put your head into the fire.
I do not wish to quarrel with any man or nation.
I am but too ready to conform to them.
It is not many moments that i live under a government, even in this world.
Statesmen and legislators, standing so completely within the institution, never distinctly and nakedly behold it.
They speak of moving society, but have no resting place without it.
They are wont to forget that the world is not governed by policy and expediency.
Webster never goes behind government, and so cannot speak with authority about it.
Comparatively, he is always strong, original, and, above all, practical.
Still his quality is not wisdom, but prudence.
The lawyer’s truth is not truth, but consistency or a consistent expediency.
There are really no blows to be given by him but defensive ones.
He is not a leader, but a follower.
They have never received any encouragement from me and they never will.
No man with a genius for legislation has appeared in america.
They are rare in the history of the world.
Is a democracy, such as we know it, the last improvement possible in government?
By nathaniel hawthorne and james r. osgood co. all rights reserved.
Preface to the second edition.
Drawn by mary hallock foote and engraved by a. v. s. anthony.
The ornamental head pieces are by l. s. ipsen.
I will not lose the child!
Introductory to the scarlet letter.
It is scarcely decorous, however, to speak all, even where we speak impersonally.
But the sentiment has likewise its moral quality.
Murmurs one gray shadow of my forefathers to the other.
A writer of story books!
Why, the degenerate fellow might as well have been a fiddler!
It is not love, but instinct.
So has it been in my case.
My doom was on me.
The whereabouts of the oldest inhabitant was at once settled, when i looked at them.
Thus, on taking charge of my department, i found few but aged men.
The greater part of my officers were whigs.
Sagaciously, under their spectacles, did they peep into the holds of vessels!
Not so with our old inspector!
One brief sigh sufficed to carry off the entire burden of these dismal reminiscences.
The step was palsied now that had been foremost in the charge.
His countenance, in this repose, was mild and kindly.
The closer you penetrated to the substance of his mind, the sounder it appeared.
The framework of his nature, originally strong and massive, was not yet crumbled into ruin.
And, in so intense a moment, his demeanor would have still been calm.
Still, even in respect of grace and beauty, there were points well worth noting.
It was the recollection of those memorable words of his, i'll try, sir!
In my contemplation, he stood as the ideal of his class.
The merchants valued him not less than we, his esoteric friends.
Such were some of the people with whom i now found myself connected.
Literature, its exertions and objects, were now of little moment in my regard.
I cared not, at this period, for books they were apart from me.
A gift, a faculty if it had not departed, was suspended and inanimate within me.
But i never considered it as other than a transitory life.
This was my all of lettered intercourse and it was quite sufficient for my necessities.
But the past was not dead.
Large quantities of similar rubbish lay lumbering the floor.
Yet not altogether worthless, perhaps, as materials of local history.
As a final disposition, i contemplate depositing them with the essex historical society.
It was the capital letter a.
And yet it strangely interested me.
My eyes fastened themselves upon the old scarlet letter, and would not be turned aside.
I shuddered, and involuntarily let it fall upon the floor.
What i contend for is the authenticity of the outline.
This incident recalled my mind, in some degree, to its old track.
There seemed to be here the groundwork of a tale.
And i said to the ghost of mr. surveyor pue, i will!
On hester prynne's story, therefore, i bestowed much thought.
My imagination was a tarnished mirror.
What have you to do with us?
That expression seemed to say.
The little power you might once have possessed over the tribe of unrealities is gone!
You have bartered it for a pittance of the public gold.
Go, then, and earn your wages!
Nothing is too small or too trifling to undergo this change, and acquire dignity thereby.
Ghosts might enter here, without affrighting us.
It converts them from snow images into men and women.
Or i might readily have found a more serious task.
These perceptions have come too late.
There was no occasion to make much moan about this state of affairs.
In some other form, perhaps, i may hereafter develop these effects.
Here was a fine prospect in the distance!
Yet my reflections were not the most comfortable.
But, all this while, i was giving myself very unnecessary alarm.
Providence had meditated better things for me than i could possibly imagine for myself.
But the long habit of victory has made them generous.
But who can see an inch into futurity, beyond his nose?
My own head was the first that fell!
So much for my figurative self.
Peace be with all the world!
My blessing on my friends!
My forgiveness to my enemies!
For i am in the realm of quiet!
The life of the custom house lies like a dream behind me.
It is with an effort that i recall the figures and appellations of these few.
Henceforth it ceases to be a reality of my life.
I am a citizen of somewhere else.
It may be, however, o, transporting and triumphant thought!
Like all that pertains to crime, it seemed never to have known a youthful era.
Madam hester would have winced at that, i warrant me.
This woman has brought shame upon us all, and ought to die.
Is there not law for it?
Truly, there is, both in the scripture and the statute book.
That is the hardest word yet!
For the lock is turning in the prison door, and here comes mistress prynne herself.
The young woman was tall, with a figure of perfect elegance on a large scale.
Whispered their youngest companion do not let her hear you!
The grim beadle now made a gesture with his staff.
Make way, good people, make way, in the king's name!
Come along, madam hester, and show your scarlet letter in the market place!
A lane was forthwith opened through the crowd of spectators.
The witnesses of hester prynne's disgrace had not yet passed beyond their simplicity.
Accordingly, the crowd was sombre and grave.
It was almost intolerable to be borne.
These were her realities, all else had vanished!
But the mother did not seem to hear it.
Very soon, however, his look became keen and penetrative.
I pray you, good sir, said he, who is this woman?
And wherefore is she here set up to public shame?
She hath raised a great scandal, i promise you, in godly master dimmesdale's church.
You say truly, replied the other.
I am a stranger, and have been a wanderer, sorely against my will.
Of this woman's offences, and what has brought her to yonder scaffold?
I conceive you, said the stranger, with a bitter smile.
It behooves him well, if he be still in life, responded the townsman.
The penalty thereof is death.
Remarked the stranger, gravely bowing his head.
But he will be known!
Hearken unto me, hester prynne!
They were, doubtless, good men, just and sage.
What say you to it, once again, brother dimmesdale?
Must it be thou, or i, that shall deal with this poor sinner's soul?
Good master dimmesdale, said he, the responsibility of this woman's soul lies greatly with you.
Speak to the woman, my brother, said mr. wilson.
Exhort her to confess the truth!
The young pastor's voice was tremulously sweet, rich, deep, and broken.
Woman, transgress not beyond the limits of heaven's mercy!
Cried the reverend mr. wilson, more harshly than before.
That, and thy repentance, may avail to take the scarlet letter off thy breast.
It is too deeply branded.
Ye cannot take it off.
And would that i might endure his agony, as well as mine!
Said another voice, coldly and sternly, proceeding from the crowd about the scaffold.
Speak and give your child a father!
And my child must seek a heavenly father she shall never know an earthly one!
He now drew back, with a long respiration.
Wondrous strength and generosity of a woman's heart!
In this state, the voice of the preacher thundered remorselessly, but unavailingly, upon her ears.
His name was announced as roger chillingworth.
Prithee, friend, leave me alone with my patient, said the practitioner.
Administer this draught, therefore, with thine own hand.
Wouldst thou avenge thyself on the innocent babe?
Responded the physician, half coldly, half soothingly.
What should ail me, to harm this misbegotten and miserable babe?
I could do no better for it.
It soon proved its efficacy, and redeemed the leech's pledge.
It may be less soothing than a sinless conscience.
That i cannot give thee.
She looked also at her slumbering child.
It is even now at my lips.
Drink, then, replied he, still with the same cold composure.
Dost thou know me so little, hester prynne?
He noticed her involuntary gesture, and smiled.
And, that thou mayest live, take off this draught.
It was my folly, and thy weakness.
If sages were ever wise in their own behoof, i might have foreseen all this.
I felt no love, nor feigned any.
But, up to that epoch of my life, i had lived in vain.
The world had been so cheerless!
I longed to kindle one!
I have greatly wronged thee, murmured hester.
We have wronged each other, answered he.
Between thee and me the scale hangs fairly balanced.
But, hester, the man lives who has wronged us both!
Replied hester prynne, looking firmly into his face.
That thou shalt never know!
Rejoined he, with a smile of dark and self relying intelligence.
Thou mayest cover up thy secret from the prying multitude.
But, as for me, i come to the inquest with other senses than they possess.
There is a sympathy that will make me conscious of him.
I shall see him tremble.
I shall feel myself shudder, suddenly and unawares.
Sooner or later, he must needs be mine!
Thou wilt not reveal his name?
Yet fear not for him!
Let him hide himself in outward honor, if he may!
Not the less he shall be mine!
Thy acts are like mercy, said hester, bewildered and appalled.
But thy words interpret thee as a terror!
One thing, thou that wast my wife, i would enjoin upon thee, continued the scholar.
Thou hast kept the secret of thy paramour.
There are none in this land that know me.
Breathe not, to any human soul, that thou didst ever call me husband!
No matter whether of love or hate no matter whether of right or wrong!
Thou and thine, hester prynne, belong to me.
My home is where thou art, and where he is.
Wherefore dost thou desire it?
Inquired hester, shrinking, she hardly knew why, from this secret bond.
Why not announce thyself openly, and cast me off at once?
It may be for other reasons.
Recognize me not, by word, by sign, by look!
Breathe not the secret, above all, to the man thou wottest of.
Shouldst thou fail me in this, beware!
His fame, his position, his life, will be in my hands.
I will keep thy secret, as i have his, said hester.
And she took the oath.
Doth thy sentence bind thee to wear the token in thy sleep?
Art thou not afraid of nightmares and hideous dreams?
Why dost thou smile so at me?
Inquired hester, troubled at the expression of his eyes.
Art thou like the black man that haunts the forest round about us?
Hast thou enticed me into a bond that will prove the ruin of my soul?
Not thy soul, he answered, with another smile.
V. hester at her needle.
Hester prynne's term of confinement was now at an end.
She could no longer borrow from the future to help her through the present grief.
Hester prynne, therefore, did not flee.
A mystic shadow of suspicion immediately attached itself to the spot.
By degrees, nor very slowly, her handiwork became what would now be termed the fashion.
The exception indicated the ever relentless rigor with which society frowned upon her sin.
We may speak further of it hereafter.
Like all other joys, she rejected it as sin.
In this manner, hester prynne came to have a part to perform in the world.
Another peculiar torture was felt in the gaze of a new eye.
But then, again, an accustomed eye had likewise its own anguish to inflict.
Its cool stare of familiarity was intolerable.
She was terror stricken by the revelations that were thus made.
Or, must she receive those intimations so obscure, yet so distinct as truth?
What evil thing is at hand?
Would hester say to herself.
Such loss of faith is ever one of the saddest results of sin.
Yet these thoughts affected hester prynne less with hope than apprehension.
Certainly, there was no physical defect.
But little pearl was not clad in rustic weeds.
The child could not be made amenable to rules.
Above all, the warfare of hester's spirit, at that epoch, was perpetuated in pearl.
But the task was beyond her skill.
Physical compulsion or restraint was effectual, of course, while it lasted.
Her only real comfort was when the child lay in the placidity of sleep.
How soon with what strange rapidity, indeed!
But this could never be.
Pearl was a born outcast of the infantile world.
Never, since her release from prison, had hester met the public gaze without her.
Pearl saw, and gazed intently, but never sought to make acquaintance.
If spoken to, she would not speak again.
All this enmity and passion had pearl inherited, by inalienable right, out of hester's heart.
It was like nothing so much as the phantasmagoric play of the northern lights.
One peculiarity of the child's deportment remains yet to be told.
The very first thing which she had noticed in her life was what?
The scarlet letter on hester's bosom!
Many a time afterwards had hester been tortured, though less vividly, by the same illusion.
Hester's first motion had been to cover her bosom with her clasped hands.
O, i am your little pearl!
Art thou my child, in very truth?
Yes i am little pearl!
Repeated the child, continuing her antics.
Thou art not my child!
Thou art no pearl of mine!
Tell me, then, what thou art, and who sent thee hither.
Said the child, seriously, coming up to hester, and pressing herself close to her knees.
Thy heavenly father sent thee!
He did not send me!
I have no heavenly father!
Thou must not talk so!
Answered the mother, suppressing a groan.
He sent us all into this world.
He sent even me, thy mother.
Or, if not, thou strange and elfish child, whence didst thou come?
Repeated pearl, no longer seriously, but laughing, and capering about the floor.
It is thou that must tell me!
But hester could not resolve the query, being herself in a dismal labyrinth of doubt.
Little pearl, of course, was her companion.
It was the scarlet letter in another form the scarlet letter endowed with life!
Come, therefore, and let us fling mud at them!
Without further adventure, they reached the dwelling of governor bellingham.
Thou must gather thine own sunshine.
I have none to give thee!
Is the worshipful governor bellingham within?
Yea, his honorable worship is within.
Ye may not see his worship now.
So the mother and little pearl were admitted into the hall of entrance.
Mother, cried she, i see you here.
In truth, she seemed absolutely hidden behind it.
Come along, pearl, said she, drawing her away.
Come and look into this fair garden.
Do not cry, dear little pearl!
I hear voices in the garden.
The governor is coming, and gentlemen along with him!
The elf child and the minister.
The shadow of the curtain fell on hester prynne, and partially concealed her.
Said governor bellingham, looking with surprise at the scarlet little figure before him.
But how gat such a guest into my hall?
Cried good old mr. wilson.
What little bird of scarlet plumage may this be?
But that was in the old land.
Art thou a christian child, ha?
I am mother's child, answered the scarlet vision, and my name is pearl!
Or red rose, at the very least, judging from thy hue!
But where is this mother of thine?
But she comes at a good time and we will look into this matter forthwith.
Governor bellingham stepped through the window into the hall, followed by his three guests.
Speak thou, the child's own mother!
What canst thou do for the child, in this kind?
I can teach my little pearl what i have learned from this!
Answered hester prynne, laying her finger on the red token.
Woman, it is thy badge of shame!
We will judge warily, said bellingham, and look well what we are about to do.
Canst thou tell me, my child, who made thee?
Cried the governor, slowly recovering from the astonishment into which pearl's response had thrown him.
Here is a child of three years old, and she cannot tell who made her!
Methinks, gentlemen, we need inquire no further.
God gave me the child!
He gave her in requital of all things else, which ye had taken from me.
She is my torture, none the less!
Pearl keeps me here in life!
Ye shall not take her!
Far better than thou canst do it!
I will not give her up!
Thou knowest, for thou hast sympathies which these men lack!
How is that, good master dimmesdale?
Make that plain, i pray you!
It must be even so, resumed the minister.
It was meant for a blessing for the one blessing of her life!
Herein is the sinful mother happier than the sinful father.
You speak, my friend, with a strange earnestness, said old roger chillingworth, smiling at him.
What say you, worshipful master bellingham?
The little baggage hath witchcraft in her, i profess, said he to mr. dimmesdale.
She needs no old woman's broomstick to fly withal!
It is easy to see the mother's part in her.
The affair being so satisfactorily concluded, hester prynne, with pearl, departed from the house.
Wilt thou go with us to night?
Make my excuse to him, so please you!
Answered hester, with a triumphant smile.
I must tarry at home, and keep watch over my little pearl.
We shall have thee there anon!
Said the witch lady, frowning, as she drew back her head.
Even thus early had the child saved her from satan's snare.
Her matronly fame was trodden under all men's feet.
Infamy was babbling around her in the public market place.
He resolved not to be pilloried beside her on her pedestal of shame.
Skilful men, of the medical and chirurgical profession, were of rare occurrence in the colony.
To such a professional body roger chillingworth was a brilliant acquisition.
About this period, however, the health of mr. dimmesdale had evidently begun to fail.
What could he, whose sphere was in great cities, be seeking in the wilderness?
Mr. dimmesdale gently repelled their entreaties.
I need no medicine, said he.
Was he weary of his labors?
Did he wish to die?
He listened in silence, and finally promised to confer with the physician.
Good men ever interpret themselves too meanly, said the physician.
In truth, he was startled, if not shocked, to find this attribute in the physician.
But the air was too fresh and chill to be long breathed with comfort.
A man burdened with a secret should especially avoid the intimacy of his physician.
Roger chillingworth possessed all, or most, of the attributes above enumerated.
It was a strange reserve!
There was much joy throughout the town, when this greatly desirable object was attained.
At first, his expression had been calm, meditative, scholar like.
No sensible man, it was confessed, could doubt on which side the victory would turn.
The leech and his patient.
Alas for his own soul, if these were what he sought!
The soil where this dark miner was working had perchance shown indications that encouraged him.
Let us dig a little further in the direction of this vein!
Even in the graveyard here at hand, answered the physician, continuing his employment.
They are new to me.
Perchance, said mr. dimmesdale, he earnestly desired it, but could not.
That, good sir, is but a fantasy of yours, replied the minister.
That, surely, were a shallow view of it.
A knowledge of men's hearts will be needful to the completest solution of that problem.
Then why not reveal them here?
Asked roger chillingworth, glancing quietly aside at the minister.
Why should not the guilty ones sooner avail themselves of this unutterable solace?
How can it be otherwise?
Yet some men bury their secrets thus, observed the calm physician.
True there are such men, answered mr. dimmesdale.
Or, can we not suppose it?
They fear to take up the shame that rightfully belongs to them.
But, if they seek to glorify god, let them not lift heavenward their unclean hands!
Trust me, such men deceive themselves!
Hester did not pluck them off.
Roger chillingworth had by this time approached the window, and smiled grimly down.
What, in heaven's name, is she?
Is the imp altogether evil?
Hath she any discoverable principle of being?
Whether capable of good, i know not.
The sensitive clergyman shrunk, with nervous dread, from the light missile.
Detecting his emotion, pearl clapped her little hands, in the most extravagant ecstasy.
Come away, or yonder old black man will catch you!
Come away, mother, or he will catch you!
But he cannot catch little pearl!
Is hester prynne the less miserable, think you, for that scarlet letter on her breast?
I do verily believe it, answered the clergyman.
Nevertheless, i cannot answer for her.
I did, answered the clergyman, and would gladly learn it.
Speak frankly, i pray you, be it for life or death.
How can you question it?
Surely, it were child's play, to call in a physician, and then hide the sore!
You would tell me, then, that i know all?
Your pardon, once again, good sir, if my speech give the shadow of offence.
Then i need ask no further, said the clergyman, somewhat hastily rising from his chair.
You deal not, i take it, in medicine for the soul!
Would you, therefore, that your physician heal the bodily evil?
Not to an earthly physician!
He, if it stand with his good pleasure, can cure or he can kill!
Let him do with me as, in his justice and wisdom, he shall see good.
But who art thou, that meddlest in this matter?
That dares thrust himself between the sufferer and his god?
We shall be friends again anon.
As with one passion, so with another!
I must needs look deeper into it.
A strange sympathy betwixt soul and body!
Were it only for the art's sake, i must search this matter to the bottom!
It must have been a work of vast ability in the somniferous school of literature.
Then, indeed, mr. dimmesdale shuddered, and slightly stirred.
After a brief pause, the physician turned away.
But, with what a wild look of wonder, joy, and horror!
But what distinguished the physician's ecstasy from satan's was the trait of wonder in it!
The interior of a heart.
The intellect of roger chillingworth had now a sufficiently plain path before it.
The clergyman's shy and sensitive reserve had balked this scheme.
A revelation, he could almost say, had been granted to him.
It mattered little, for his object, whether celestial, or from what other region.
He could play upon him as he chose.
Would he arouse him with a throb of agony?
He won it, indeed, in great part, by his sorrows.
Their voices came down, afar and indistinctly, from the upper heights where they habitually dwelt.
Oftenest persuasive, but sometimes terrible!
The people knew not the power that moved them thus.
They deemed the young clergyman a miracle of holiness.
They fancied him the mouthpiece of heaven's messages of wisdom, and rebuke, and love.
In their eyes, the very ground on which he trod was sanctified.
It is inconceivable, the agony with which this public veneration tortured him!
Or the dimmest of all shadows?
More than once nay, more than a hundred times he had actually spoken!
Could there be plainer speech than this?
They heard it all, and did but reverence him the more.
They little guessed what deadly purport lurked in those self condemning words.
The minister well knew subtle, but remorseful hypocrite that he was!
The light in which his vague confession would be viewed.
He had spoken the very truth, and transformed it into the veriest falsehood.
Therefore, above all things else, he loathed his miserable self!
In mr. dimmesdale's secret closet, under lock and key, there was a bloody scourge.
He thus typified the constant introspection wherewith he tortured, but could not purify, himself.
None of these visions ever quite deluded him.
A new thought had struck him.
There might be a moment's peace in it.
An unvaried pall of cloud muffled the whole expanse of sky from zenith to horizon.
But the town was all asleep.
There was no peril of discovery.
Why, then, had he come hither?
Was it but the mockery of penitence?
A mockery, indeed, but in which his soul trifled with itself!
A mockery at which angels blushed and wept, while fiends rejoiced, with jeering laughter!
What right had infirmity like his to burden itself with crime?
Muttered the minister, covering his face with his hands.
The whole town will awake, and hurry forth, and find me here!
But it was not so.
The clergyman, therefore, hearing no symptoms of disturbance, uncovered his eyes and looked about him.
He looked like a ghost, evoked unseasonably from the grave.
The cry had evidently startled him.
She thrust forth her head from the lattice, and looked anxiously upward.
Possibly, she went up among the clouds.
The minister saw nothing further of her motions.
The minister grew comparatively calm.
A good evening to you, venerable father wilson!
Come up hither, i pray you, and pass a pleasant hour with me!
Had mr. dimmesdale actually spoken?
For one instant, he believed that these words had passed his lips.
Morning would break, and find him there.
The neighborhood would begin to rouse itself.
A dusky tumult would flap its wings from one house to another.
Whom would they discern there, with the red eastern light upon his brow?
Cried he after a moment's pause then, suppressing his voice, hester!
Yes it is hester prynne!
It is i, and my little pearl.
Come up hither, hester, thou and little pearl, said the reverend mr. dimmesdale.
Ye have both been here before, but i was not with you.
Come up hither once again, and we will stand all three together!
The minister felt for the child's other hand, and took it.
The three formed an electric chain.
What wouldst thou say, child?
Wilt thou stand here with mother and me, to morrow noontide?
Pearl laughed, and attempted to pull away her hand.
But the minister held it fast.
A moment longer, my child!
Not then, pearl, said the minister, but another time.
The great vault brightened, like the dome of an immense lamp.
She withdrew her hand from mr. dimmesdale's, and pointed across the street.
Pestilence was known to have been foreboded by a shower of crimson light.
Not seldom, it had been seen by multitudes.
There was a singular circumstance that characterized mr. dimmesdale's psychological state, at this moment.
The minister appeared to see him, with the same glance that discerned the miraculous letter.
Who is that man, hester?
Gasped mr. dimmesdale, overcome with terror.
Dost thou know the man?
She remembered her oath, and was silent.
I tell thee, my soul shivers at him!
Canst thou do nothing for me?
I have a nameless horror of the man!
Minister, said little pearl, i can tell thee who he is!
Said the minister, bending his ear close to her lips.
And as low as thou canst whisper.
The elvish child then laughed aloud.
Dost thou mock me now?
Thou wouldst not promise to take my hand, and mother's hand, to morrow noontide!
Worthy sir, answered the physician, who had now advanced to the foot of the platform.
Pious master dimmesdale, can this be you?
Come, good sir, and my dear friend, i pray you, let me lead you home!
How knewest thou that i was here?
Verily, and in good faith, answered roger chillingworth, i knew nothing of the matter.
See now, how they trouble the brain, these books!
I will go home with you, said mr. dimmesdale.
Satan dropped it there, i take it, intending a scurrilous jest against your reverence.
But, indeed, he was blind and foolish, as he ever and always is.
A pure hand needs no glove to cover it!
Yes, it seems to be my glove, indeed!
But did your reverence hear of the portent that was seen last night?
No, answered the minister, i had not heard of it.
His nerve seemed absolutely destroyed.
His moral force was abased into more than childish weakness.
She decided, moreover, that he had a right to her utmost aid.
Like all other ties, it brought along with it its obligations.
Years had come and gone.
In this matter of hester prynne, there was neither irritation nor irksomeness.
None so self devoted as hester, when pestilence stalked through the town.
There glimmered the embroidered letter, with comfort in its unearthly ray.
Elsewhere the token of sin, it was the taper of the sick chamber.
They said that it meant able so strong was hester prynne, with a woman's strength.
It was only the darkened house that could contain her.
When sunshine came again, she was not there.
Her shadow had faded across the threshold.
Meeting them in the street, she never raised her head to receive their greeting.
Do you see that woman with the embroidered badge?
They would say to strangers.
Had she fallen among thieves, it would have kept her safe.
Even the attractiveness of her person had undergone a similar change.
The latter is perhaps the truest theory.
We shall see whether hester prynne were ever afterwards so touched, and so transfigured.
Men of the sword had overthrown nobles and kings.
Hester prynne imbibed this spirit.
The thought suffices them, without investing itself in the flesh and blood of action.
So it seemed to be with hester.
She might, in one of her phases, have been a prophetess.
Was existence worth accepting, even to the happiest among them?
She discerns, it may be, such a hopeless task before her.
A woman never overcomes these problems by any exercise of thought.
They are not to be solved, or only in one way.
If her heart chance to come uppermost, they vanish.
There was wild and ghastly scenery all around her, and a home and comfort nowhere.
The scarlet letter had not done its office.
She determined to redeem her error, so far as it might yet be possible.
She had climbed her way, since then, to a higher point.
The occasion was not long to seek.
Come thou into the pool!
Meanwhile, her mother had accosted the physician.
I would speak a word with you, said she, a word that concerns us much.
And is it mistress hester that has a word for old roger chillingworth?
Answered he, raising himself from his stooping posture.
Why, mistress, i hear good tidings of you on all hands!
Nay, then, wear it, if it suit you better, rejoined he.
A woman must needs follow her own fancy, touching the adornment of her person.
The letter is gayly embroidered, and shows right bravely on your bosom!
The scarlet letter burned on hester prynne's bosom.
Here was another ruin, the responsibility of which came partly home to her.
It is of yonder miserable man that i would speak.
So speak freely and i will make answer.
Since that day, no man is so near to him as you.
You tread behind his every footstep.
You burrow and rankle in his heart!
It had been better so!
What evil have i done the man?
O, i could reveal a goodly secret!
What art can do, i have exhausted on him.
That he now breathes, and creeps about on earth, is owing all to me!
Better he had died at once!
Yea, woman, thou sayest truly!
Better had he died at once!
Never did mortal suffer what this man has suffered.
And all, all, in the sight of his worst enemy!
He has been conscious of me.
But he knew not that the eye and hand were mine!
But it was the constant shadow of my presence!
The closest propinquity of the man whom he had most vilely wronged!
And who had grown to exist only by this perpetual poison of the direst revenge!
There was a fiend at his elbow!
Not improbably, he had never before viewed himself as he did now.
Hast thou not tortured him enough?
Said hester, noticing the old man's look.
Has he not paid thee all?
He has but increased the debt!
Dost thou remember me, hester, as i was nine years agone?
Was i not all this?
All this, and more, said hester.
And what am i now?
I have already told thee what i am!
It was i, not less than he.
Why hast thou not avenged thyself on me?
I have left thee to the scarlet letter, replied roger chillingworth.
If that have not avenged me, i can do no more!
He laid his finger on it, with a smile.
I judged no less, said the physician.
And now, what wouldst thou with me touching this man?
I must reveal the secret, answered hester, firmly.
He must discern thee in thy true character.
What may be the result, i know not.
Do with him as thou wilt!
There is no good for him, no good for me, no good for thee!
There is no good for little pearl!
There is no path to guide us out of this dismal maze!
Woman, i could wellnigh pity thee!
I pity thee, for the good that has been wasted in thy nature!
If not for his sake, then doubly for thine own!
Forgive, and leave his further retribution to the power that claims it!
Wilt thou give up that only privilege?
Wilt thou reject that priceless benefit?
Replied the old man, with gloomy sternness.
It is not granted me to pardon.
I have no such power as thou tellest me of.
Now go thy ways, and deal as thou wilt with yonder man.
He waved his hand, and betook himself again to his employment of gathering herbs.
His gray beard almost touched the ground, as he crept onward.
Did the sun, which shone so brightly everywhere else, really fall upon him?
And whither was he now going?
She marvelled how such scenes could have been!
She marvelled how she could ever have been wrought upon to marry him!
Repeated hester, more bitterly than before.
He has done me worse wrong than i did him!
But hester ought long ago to have done with this injustice.
He being gone, she summoned back her child.
She inherited her mother's gift for devising drapery and costume.
A letter, the letter a, but freshly green, instead of scarlet!
I wonder if mother will ask me what it means?
Yes, mother, said the child.
It is the great letter a. thou hast taught me in the horn book.
She felt a morbid desire to ascertain the point.
Dost thou know, child, wherefore thy mother wears this letter?
Answered pearl, looking brightly into her mother's face.
It is for the same reason that the minister keeps his hand over his heart!
And what reason is that?
What has the letter to do with any heart, save mine?
Ask yonder old man whom thou hast been talking with!
It may be he can tell.
But in good earnest now, mother dear, what does this scarlet letter mean?
And why dost thou wear it on thy bosom?
And why does the minister keep his hand over his heart?
It showed pearl in an unwonted aspect.
And this, moreover, was a mother's estimate of the child's disposition.
What does the letter mean, mother?
And why dost thou wear it?
If this be the price of the child's sympathy, i cannot pay it.
Silly pearl, said she, what questions are these?
What know i of the minister's heart?
As for little pearl, the earnestness soon passed out of her face.
Mother, said she, what does the scarlet letter mean?
Why does the minister keep his hand over his heart?
Hold thy tongue, naughty child!
Answered her mother, with an asperity that she had never permitted to herself before.
Do not tease me else i shall shut thee into the dark closet!
He would probably return, by a certain hour, in the afternoon of the morrow.
It straggled onward into the mystery of the primeval forest.
The day was chill and sombre.
Mother, said little pearl, the sunshine does not love you.
There it is, playing, a good way off.
I am but a child.
Nor ever will, my child, i hope, said hester.
Asked pearl, stopping short, just at the beginning of her race.
Will not it come of its own accord, when i am a woman grown?
Run away, child, answered her mother, and catch the sunshine!
It will soon be gone.
It will go now, said pearl, shaking her head.
Now i can stretch out my hand, and grasp some of it.
It was certainly a doubtful charm, imparting a hard, metallic lustre to the child's character.
But there was time enough yet for little pearl.
We will sit down a little way within the wood, and rest ourselves.
I am not aweary, mother, replied the little girl.
But you may sit down, if you will tell me a story meanwhile.
And then he sets his mark on their bosoms!
Didst thou ever meet the black man, mother?
And who told you this story, pearl?
Asked her mother, recognizing a common superstition of the period.
But she fancied me asleep while she was talking of it.
And that ugly tempered lady, old mistress hibbins, was one.
And dost thou go to meet him in the night time?
Didst thou ever awake, and find thy mother gone?
Not that i remember, said the child.
I would very gladly go!
But, mother, tell me now!
Is there such a black man?
And didst thou ever meet him?
And is this his mark?
Wilt thou let me be at peace, if i once tell thee?
Yes, if thou tellest me all, answered pearl.
Once in my life i met the black man!
This scarlet letter is his mark!
O foolish and tiresome little brook!
Cried pearl, after listening awhile to its talk.
Why art thou so sad?
Pluck up a spirit, and do not be all the time sighing and murmuring!
But, unlike the little stream, she danced and sparkled, and prattled airily along her course.
What does this sad little brook say, mother?
Is it the black man?
Wilt thou go and play, child?
But do not stray far into the wood.
And take heed that thou come at my first call.
It is no black man!
Thou canst see him now, through the trees.
And, mother, he has his hand over his heart!
But why does he not wear it outside his bosom, as thou dost, mother?
But do not stray far.
Keep where thou canst hear the babble of the brook.
Death was too definite an object to be wished for, or avoided.
The pastor and his parishioner.
She said, faintly at first then louder, but hoarsely.
He made a step nigher, and discovered the scarlet letter.
In such life as has been mine these seven years past!
And thou, arthur dimmesdale, dost thou yet live?
Each a ghost, and awe stricken at the other ghost!
The soul beheld its features in the mirror of the passing moment.
The grasp, cold as it was, took away what was dreariest in the interview.
They now felt themselves, at least, inhabitants of the same sphere.
After a while, the minister fixed his eyes on hester prynne's.
Hester, said he, hast thou found peace?
She smiled drearily, looking down upon her bosom.
Nay, i never should have lost it!
Hester, i am most miserable!
The people reverence thee, said hester.
And surely thou workest good among them!
Doth this bring thee no comfort?
Answered the clergyman, with a bitter smile.
It must needs be a delusion.
What can a ruined soul, like mine, effect towards the redemption of other souls?
Or a polluted soul towards their purification?
And as for the people's reverence, would that it were turned to scorn and hatred!
And then look inward, and discern the black reality of what they idolize?
And satan laughs at it!
You wrong yourself in this, said hester, gently.
You have deeply and sorely repented.
Your sin is left behind you, in the days long past.
Is there no reality in the penitence thus sealed and witnessed by good works?
And wherefore should it not bring you peace?
There is no substance in it!
It is cold and dead, and can do nothing for me!
Of penance, i have had enough!
Of penitence, there has been none!
Happy are you, hester, that wear the scarlet letter openly upon your bosom!
Had i one friend, or were it my worst enemy!
Even thus much of truth would save me!
But, now, it is all falsehood!
Hester prynne looked into his face, but hesitated to speak.
She conquered her fears, and spoke.
Again she hesitated, but brought out the words with an effort.
Thou hast long had such an enemy, and dwellest with him, under the same roof!
And under mine own roof!
She now read his heart more accurately.
O arthur, cried she, forgive me!
In all things else, i have striven to be true!
Then i consented to a deception.
But a lie is never good, even though death threaten on the other side!
Dost thou not see what i would say?
He whom they call roger chillingworth!
Never was there a blacker or a fiercer frown than hester now encountered.
For the brief space that it lasted, it was a dark transfiguration.
I might have known it, murmured he.
Why did i not understand?
O hester prynne, thou little, little knowest all the horror of this thing!
Woman, woman, thou art accountable for this!
Cried hester, flinging herself on the fallen leaves beside him.
He would have released himself, but strove in vain to do so.
Hester would not set him free, lest he should look her sternly in the face.
Heaven, likewise, had frowned upon her, and she had not died.
Wilt thou yet forgive me?
She repeated, over and over again.
I freely forgive you now.
May god forgive us both!
We are not, hester, the worst sinners in the world.
There is one worse than even the polluted priest!
That old man's revenge has been blacker than my sin.
He has violated, in cold blood, the sanctity of a human heart.
Thou and i, hester, never did so!
What we did had a consecration of its own.
We said so to each other!
Said arthur dimmesdale, rising from the ground.
No i have not forgotten!
So they lingered an instant longer.
Hester, cried he, here is a new horror!
Roger chillingworth knows your purpose to reveal his true character.
Will he continue, then, to keep our secret?
What will now be the course of his revenge?
He will doubtless seek other means of satiating his dark passion.
How am i to live longer, breathing the same air with this deadly enemy?
Thou must dwell no longer with this man, said hester, slowly and firmly.
Thy heart must be no longer under his evil eye!
It were far worse than death!
But how to avoid it?
What choice remains to me?
Must i sink down there, and die at once?
Alas, what a ruin has befallen thee!
Said hester, with the tears gushing into her eyes.
Wilt thou die for very weakness?
There is no other cause!
The judgment of god is on me, answered the conscience stricken priest.
It is too mighty for me to struggle with!
Be thou strong for me!
Advise me what to do.
Is the world, then, so narrow?
Whither leads yonder forest track?
Backward to the settlement, thou sayest!
Yes, hester but only under the fallen leaves!
Replied the minister, with a sad smile.
Then there is the broad pathway of the sea!
They have kept thy better part in bondage too long already!
Answered the minister, listening as if he were called upon to realize a dream.
I am powerless to go!
But thou shalt leave it all behind thee!
Leave this wreck and ruin here where it hath happened.
Meddle no more with it!
Hast thou exhausted possibility in the failure of this one trial?
There is happiness to be enjoyed!
There is good to be done!
Exchange this false life of thine for a true one.
That have made thee feeble to will and to do!
That will leave thee powerless even to repent!
It was the last expression of the despondency of a broken spirit.
He lacked energy to grasp the better fortune that seemed within his reach.
Thou shalt not go alone!
Answered she, in a deep whisper.
The tendency of her fate and fortunes had been to set her free.
The scarlet letter was her passport into regions where other women dared not tread.
But this had been a sin of passion, not of principle, nor even purpose.
As a priest, the framework of his order inevitably hemmed him in.
The struggle, if there were one, need not be described.
Let it suffice, that the clergyman resolved to flee, and not alone.
O thou to whom i dare not lift mine eyes, wilt thou yet pardon me!
Said hester, calmly, as he met her glance.
Do i feel joy again?
Cried he, wondering at himself.
Methought the germ of it was dead in me!
O hester, thou art my better angel!
This is already the better life!
Why did we not find it sooner?
Let us not look back, answered hester prynne.
Wherefore should we linger upon it now?
With this symbol, i undo it all, and make it as it had never been!
The mystic token alighted on the hither verge of the stream.
She had not known the weight, until she felt the freedom!
A crimson flush was glowing on her cheek, that had been long so pale.
The objects that had made a shadow hitherto, embodied the brightness now.
Thou hast seen her, yes, i know it!
But thou wilt see her now with other eyes.
She is a strange child!
Dost thou think the child will be glad to know me?
Asked the minister, somewhat uneasily.
I have even been afraid of little pearl!
But she will love thee dearly, and thou her.
She is not far off.
I see the child, observed the minister.
So thou thinkest the child will love me?
She heard her mother's voice, and approached slowly through the forest.
These pearl gathered, and was pleased with their wild flavor.
The small denizens of the wilderness hardly took pains to move out of her path.
Slowly for she saw the clergyman.
The child at the brook side.
Dost thou not think her beautiful?
And see with what natural skill she has made those simple flowers adorn her!
She is a splendid child!
Methought o hester, what a thought is that, and how terrible to dread it!
But she is mostly thine!
Answered the mother, with a tender smile.
But how strangely beautiful she looks, with those wild flowers in her hair!
In her was visible the tie that united them.
And pearl was the oneness of their being.
Our pearl is a fitful and fantastic little elf, sometimes.
But the child hath strong affections!
She loves me, and will love thee!
Even little babes, when i take them in my arms, weep bitterly.
Yet pearl, twice in her little lifetime, hath been kind to me!
The first time, thou knowest it well!
And thou didst plead so bravely in her behalf and mine!
I remember it and so shall little pearl.
She may be strange and shy at first, but will soon learn to love thee!
Pray hasten her for this delay has already imparted a tremor to my nerves.
Said hester, encouragingly, and stretching out both her arms.
When hast thou been so sluggish before now?
Here is a friend of mine, who must be thy friend also.
Thou wilt have twice as much love, henceforward, as thy mother alone could give thee!
Leap across the brook, and come to us.
Thou canst leap like a young deer!
Thou strange child, why dost thou not come to me?
Hasten, pearl or i shall be angry with thee!
Leap across the brook, naughty child, and run hither!
Else i must come to thee!
Pearl misses something which she has always seen me wear!
In pearl's young beauty, as in the wrinkled witch, it has a preternatural effect.
Pacify her, if thou lovest me!
Pearl, said she, sadly, look down at thy feet!
On the hither side of the brook!
Come thou and take it up!
Was ever such a child!
Observed hester, aside to the minister.
O, i have much to tell thee about her!
The forest cannot hide it!
The mid ocean shall take it from my hand, and swallow it up forever!
She had flung it into infinite space!
She had drawn an hour's free breath!
And here again was the scarlet misery, glittering on the old spot!
When the dreary change was wrought, she extended her hand to pearl.
Dost thou know thy mother now, child?
Asked she, reproachfully, but with a subdued tone.
Answered the child, bounding across the brook, and clasping hester in her arms.
Now thou art my mother indeed!
And i am thy little pearl!
When thou hast shown me a little love, thou mockest me!
Why doth the minister sit yonder?
He waits to welcome thee, replied her mother.
Come thou, and entreat his blessing!
He loves thee, my little pearl, and loves thy mother too.
Wilt thou not love him?
He longs to greet thee!
Said pearl, looking up, with acute intelligence, into her mother's face.
Will he go back with us, hand in hand, we three together, into the town?
Not now, dear child, answered hester.
But in days to come he will walk hand in hand with us.
Thou wilt love him wilt thou not?
And will he always keep his hand over his heart?
Foolish child, what a question is that!
Come and ask his blessing!
The minister in a maze.
So the minister had not fallen asleep and dreamed!
It would probably be on the fourth day from the present.
He had then said to himself.
Now, why the reverend mr. dimmesdale considered it so very fortunate, we hesitate to reveal.
Not the less, however, came this importunately obtrusive sense of change.
His friends, no doubt, would still have insisted with him, thou art thyself the man!
But the error would have been their own, not his.
For instance, he met one of his own deacons.
Again, another incident of the same nature.
What he really did whisper, the minister could never afterwards recollect.
She was fair and pure as a lily that had bloomed in paradise.
This lost and desperate man.
Or am i given over utterly to the fiend?
Cackled the old witch lady, still nodding her high head dress at the minister.
Well, well, we must needs talk thus in the daytime!
But at midnight, and in the forest, we shall have other talk together!
He had made a bargain very like it!
A bitter kind of knowledge that!
Not wholly devoid of an idea that he might behold an evil spirit.
It was old roger chillingworth that entered.
Welcome home, reverend sir, said the physician.
And how found you that godly man, the apostle eliot?
Nay, i think not so, rejoined the reverend mr. dimmesdale.
Yet did the physician, in his dark way, creep frightfully near the secret.
Were it not better, said he, that you use my poor skill to night?
Yea, to another world, replied the minister, with pious resignation.
I joy to hear it, answered the physician.
I thank you, and can but requite your good deeds with my prayers.
A good man's prayers are golden recompense!
Rejoined old roger chillingworth, as he took his leave.
Look your last on the scarlet letter and its wearer!
Yet a little while, and she will be beyond your reach!
Pearl was decked out with airy gayety.
She broke continually into shouts of a wild, inarticulate, and sometimes piercing music.
Why, what is this, mother?
Wherefore have all the people left their work to day?
Is it a play day for the whole world?
See, there is the blacksmith!
And there is master brackett, the old jailer, nodding and smiling at me.
Why does he do so, mother?
He remembers thee a little babe, my child, answered hester.
But see, mother, how many faces of strange people, and indians among them, and sailors!
What have they all come to do, here in the market place?
They wait to see the procession pass, said hester.
And will the minister be there?
He will be there, child, answered her mother.
But he will not greet thee to day nor must thou greet him.
What a strange, sad man is he!
Said the child, as if speaking partly to herself.
A strange, sad man is he, with his hand always over his heart!
Thou understandest not these things, said her mother.
We have yet to learn again the forgotten art of gayety.
Nor, wild as were these painted barbarians, were they the wildest feature of the scene.
No fear of scurvy or ship fever, this voyage!
Inquired hester, startled more than she permitted to appear.
They have long dwelt together.
Nothing further passed between the mariner and hester prynne.
The change may be for good or ill, and is partly, perhaps, for both.
Yet, if the clergyman were rightly viewed, his strength seemed not of the body.
It might be spiritual, and imparted to him by angelic ministrations.
There was his body, moving onward, and with an unaccustomed force.
But where was his mind?
One glance of recognition, she had imagined, must needs pass between them.
How deeply had they known each other then!
And was this the man?
She hardly knew him now!
When the whole had gone by, she looked up into hester's face.
Mother, said she, was that the same minister that kissed me by the brook?
Hold thy peace, dear little pearl!
What would the minister have said, mother?
Well for thee, foolish child, that thou didst not speak to him!
Now, what mortal imagination could conceive it!
Whispered the old lady, confidentially, to hester.
We know what that means, hester prynne!
But, truly, forsooth, i find it hard to believe him the same man.
Cried the old lady, shaking her finger at hester.
I know thee, hester for i behold the token.
Thou wearest it openly so there need be no question about that.
Let me tell thee, in thine ear!
What is it, good mistress hibbins?
Responded mistress hibbins, making pearl a profound reverence.
Thou thyself wilt see it, one time or another.
They say, child, thou art of the lineage of the prince of the air!
Wilt thou ride with me, some fine night, to see thy father?
Then thou shalt know wherefore the minister keeps his hand over his heart!
An irresistible feeling kept hester near the spot.
It was this profound and continual undertone that gave the clergyman his most appropriate power.
During all this time, hester stood, statue like, at the foot of the scaffold.
She had an undulating, but, oftentimes, a sharp and irregular movement.
Thy mother is yonder woman with the scarlet letter, said the seaman.
Wilt thou carry her a message from me?
If the message pleases me, i will, answered pearl.
So let thy mother take no thought, save for herself and thee.
Wilt thou tell her this, thou witch baby?
Mistress hibbins says my father is the prince of the air!
Cried pearl, with a naughty smile.
The sainted minister in the church!
The woman of the scarlet letter in the market place!
The revelation of the scarlet letter.
There was a momentary silence, profound as what should follow the utterance of oracles.
In the open air their rapture broke into speech.
When they were fairly in the market place, their presence was greeted by a shout.
Never, from the soil of new england, had gone up such a shout!
How fared it with him then?
How feeble and pale he looked, amid all his triumph!
The minister tremulously, but decidedly, repelled the old man's arm.
There stood hester, holding little pearl by the hand!
And there was the scarlet letter on her breast!
It summoned him onward, onward to the festival!
But here he made a pause.
Bellingham, for the last few moments, had kept an anxious eye upon him.
He turned towards the scaffold, and stretched forth his arms.
Hester, said he, come hither!
Do not blacken your fame, and perish in dishonor!
I can yet save you!
Would you bring infamy on your sacred profession?
Methinks thou art too late!
Answered the minister, encountering his eye, fearfully, but firmly.
Thy power is not what it was!
With god's help, i shall escape thee now!
He again extended his hand to the woman of the scarlet letter.
This wretched and wronged old man is opposing it with all his might!
With all his own might, and the fiend's!
Support me up yonder scaffold!
The crowd was in a tumult.
Thanks be to him who hath led me hither!
Is not this better, murmured he, than what we dreamed of in the forest?
Yea so we may both die, and little pearl die with us!
Let me now do the will which he hath made plain before my sight.
For, hester, i am a dying man.
So let me make haste to take my shame upon me!
Ye, that have deemed me holy!
Behold me here, the one sinner of the world!
Lo, the scarlet letter which hester wears!
Ye have all shuddered at it!
The angels were forever pointing at it!
And sad, because he missed his heavenly kindred!
Now, at the death hour, he stands up before you!
He bids you look again at hester's scarlet letter!
Stand any here that question god's judgment on a sinner?
Behold a dreadful witness of it!
With a convulsive motion, he tore away the ministerial band from before his breast.
But it were irreverent to describe that revelation.
Then, down he sank upon the scaffold!
Hester partly raised him, and supported his head against her bosom.
He repeated more than once.
Thou, too, hast deeply sinned!
Thou wouldst not, yonder, in the forest!
Towards her mother, too, pearl's errand as a messenger of anguish was all fulfilled.
Hester, said the clergyman, farewell!
Shall we not meet again?
Whispered she, bending her face down close to his.
Shall we not spend our immortal life together?
Surely, surely, we have ransomed one another, with all this woe!
Thou lookest far into eternity, with those bright dying eyes!
Then tell me what thou seest?
Said he, with tremulous solemnity.
The sin here so awfully revealed!
Let these alone be in thy thoughts!
God knows and he is merciful!
By bringing me hither, to die this death of triumphant ignominy before the people!
Had either of these agonies been wanting, i had been lost forever!
That final word came forth with the minister's expiring breath.
The reader may choose among these theories.
Leaving this discussion apart, we have a matter of business to communicate to the reader.
The story of the scarlet letter grew into a legend.
And hester prynne had returned, and taken up her long forsaken shame!
But where was little pearl?
Letters came, with armorial seals upon them, though of bearings unknown to english heraldry.
Never afterwards did it quit her bosom.
Hester comforted and counselled them as best she might.
So said hester prynne, and glanced her sad eyes downward at the scarlet letter.
Yet one tombstone served for both.
A haze rested on the low shores that ran out to sea in vanishing flatness.
The director of companies was our captain and our host.
We four affectionately watched his back as he stood in the bows looking to seaward.
On the whole river there was nothing that looked half so nautical.
He resembled a pilot, which to a seaman is trustworthiness personified.
Between us there was, as i have already said somewhere, the bond of the sea.
Marlow sat cross legged right aft, leaning against the mizzen mast.
We exchanged a few words lazily.
Afterwards there was silence on board the yacht.
For some reason or other we did not begin that game of dominoes.
We felt meditative, and fit for nothing but placid staring.
The day was ending in a serenity of still and exquisite brilliance.
It had known the ships and the men.
The dreams of men, the seed of commonwealths, the germs of empires.
The chapman light house, a three legged thing erect on a mud flat, shone strongly.
He was the only man of us who still followed the sea.
One ship is very much like another, and the sea is always the same.
His remark did not seem at all surprising.
It was just like marlow.
It was accepted in silence.
But darkness was here yesterday.
Imagine the feelings of a commander of a fine what d'ye call 'em?
No falernian wine here, no going ashore.
They must have been dying like flies here.
Oh, yes he did it.
There's no initiation either into such mysteries.
He has to live in the midst of the incomprehensible, which is also detestable.
And it has a fascination, too, that goes to work upon him.
What saves us is efficiency the devotion to efficiency.
But these chaps were not much account, really.
They were no colonists their administration was merely a squeeze, and nothing more, i suspect.
They grabbed what they could get for the sake of what was to be got.
What redeems it is the idea only.
It was the farthest point of navigation and the culminating point of my experience.
And yet it seemed to throw a kind of light.
But the ships wouldn't even look at me.
And i got tired of that game, too.
Now when i was a little chap i had a passion for maps.
The north pole was one of these places, i remember.
Well, i haven't been there yet, and shall not try now.
Other places were scattered about the hemispheres.
I have been in some of them, and... well, we won't talk about that.
True, by this time it was not a blank space any more.
It had got filled since my boyhood with rivers and lakes and names.
It had become a place of darkness.
Then i remembered there was a big concern, a company for trade on that river.
Why shouldn't i try to get charge of one?
I went on along fleet street, but could not shake off the idea.
The snake had charmed me.
I am sorry to own i began to worry them.
This was already a fresh departure for me.
I was not used to get things that way, you know.
The men said 'my dear fellow,' and did nothing.
Then would you believe it?
I, charlie marlow, set the women to work to get a job.
Well, you see, the notion drove me.
I had an aunt, a dear enthusiastic soul.
She wrote 'it will be delightful.
I am ready to do anything, anything for you.
It is a glorious idea.
I got my appointment of course and i got it very quick.
This was my chance, and it made me the more anxious to go.
The supernatural being had not been touched after he fell.
A calamity had come to it, sure enough.
What became of the hens i don't know either.
I should think the cause of progress got them, anyhow.
I had no difficulty in finding the company's offices.
I gave my name, and looked about.
However, i wasn't going into any of these.
I was going into the yellow.
And the river was there fascinating deadly like a snake.
Its light was dim, and a heavy writing desk squatted in the middle.
From behind that structure came out an impression of pale plumpness in a frock coat.
He shook hands, i fancy, murmured vaguely, was satisfied with my french.
I believe i undertook amongst other things not to disclose any trade secrets.
Well, i am not going to.
I began to feel slightly uneasy.
In the outer room the two women knitted black wool feverishly.
People were arriving, and the younger one was walking back and forth introducing them.
The old one sat on her chair.
She glanced at me above the glasses.
The swift and indifferent placidity of that look troubled me.
She seemed to know all about them and about me, too.
An eerie feeling came over me.
She seemed uncanny and fateful.
Old knitter of black wool.
There was yet a visit to the doctor.
He became very cool and collected all at once.
The old doctor felt my pulse, evidently thinking of something else the while.
And when they come back, too?
He smiled, as if at some quiet joke.
So you are going out there.
He gave me a searching glance, and made another note.
Ever any madness in your family?
He asked, in a matter of fact tone.
Is that question in the interests of science, too?
Every doctor should be a little,' answered that original, imperturbably.
The mere wealth i leave to others.
If i were,' said i, 'i wouldn't be talking like this with you.
What you say is rather profound, and probably erroneous,' he said, with a laugh.
Avoid irritation more than exposure to the sun.
How do you english say, eh?
In the tropics one must before everything keep calm.'...
He lifted a warning forefinger.... ' du calme, du calme .
One thing more remained to do say good bye to my excellent aunt.
It appeared, however, i was also one of the workers, with a capital you know.
Something like an emissary of light, something like a lower sort of apostle.
I ventured to hint that the company was run for profit.
You forget, dear charlie, that the labourer is worthy of his hire,' she said, brightly.
It's queer how out of touch with truth women are.
Watching a coast as it slips by the ship is like thinking about an enigma.
The sun was fierce, the land seemed to glisten and drip with steam.
They were just flung out there, and on we went.
It was something natural, that had its reason, that had a meaning.
Now and then a boat from the shore gave one a momentary contact with reality.
It was paddled by black fellows.
You could see from afar the white of their eyeballs glistening.
They wanted no excuse for being there.
They were a great comfort to look at.
Something would turn up to scare it away.
Once, i remember, we came upon a man of war anchored off the coast.
There wasn't even a shed there, and she was shelling the bush.
It appears the french had one of their wars going on thereabouts.
Hidden out of sight somewhere.
We gave her her letters and went on.
It was like a weary pilgrimage amongst hints for nightmares.
It was upward of thirty days before i saw the mouth of the big river.
We anchored off the seat of the government.
But my work would not begin till some two hundred miles farther on.
I had my passage on a little sea going steamer.
As we left the miserable little wharf, he tossed his head contemptuously at the shore.
Fine lot these government chaps are they not?
He went on, speaking english with great precision and considerable bitterness.
It is funny what some people will do for a few francs a month.
I wonder what becomes of that kind when it goes upcountry?
I said to him i expected to see that soon.
He shuffled athwart, keeping one eye ahead vigilantly.
Don't be too sure,' he continued.
The other day i took up a man who hanged himself on the road.
He was a swede, too.
He kept on looking out watchfully.
The sun too much for him, or the country perhaps.
At last we opened a reach.
A continuous noise of the rapids above hovered over this scene of inhabited devastation.
A lot of people, mostly black and naked, moved about like ants.
A blinding sunlight drowned all this at times in a sudden recrudescence of glare.
I will send your things up.
Four boxes did you say?
The thing looked as dead as the carcass of some animal.
I came upon more pieces of decaying machinery, a stack of rusty rails.
I blinked, the path was steep.
A horn tooted to the right, and i saw the black people run.
No change appeared on the face of the rock.
They were building a railway.
A slight clinking behind me made me turn my head.
Six black men advanced in a file, toiling up the path.
Instead of going up, i turned and descended to the left.
You know i am not particularly tender i've had to strike and to fend off.
For a moment i stood appalled, as though by a warning.
Finally i descended the hill, obliquely, towards the trees i had seen.
It wasn't a quarry or a sandpit, anyhow.
It was just a hole.
There wasn't one that was not broken.
It was a wanton smash up.
At last i got under the trees.
The work was going on.
And this was the place where some of the helpers had withdrawn to die.
They were dying slowly it was very clear.
These moribund shapes were free as air and nearly as thin.
I began to distinguish the gleam of the eyes under the trees.
Then, glancing down, i saw a face near my hand.
He had tied a bit of white worsted round his neck why?
Where did he get it?
Was it a badge an ornament a charm a propitiatory act?
Was there any idea at all connected with it?
Hair parted, brushed, oiled, under a green lined parasol held in a big white hand.
He was amazing, and had a penholder behind his ear.
The expression sounded wonderfully odd, with its suggestion of sedentary desk life.
Moreover, i respected the fellow.
Yes i respected his collars, his vast cuffs, his brushed hair.
His starched collars and got up shirt fronts were achievements of character.
She had a distaste for the work.
Thus this man had verily accomplished something.
And he was devoted to his books, which were in apple pie order.
Everything else in the station was in a muddle heads, things, buildings.
I had to wait in the station for ten days an eternity.
There was no need to open the big shutter to see.
It was hot there, too big flies buzzed fiendishly, and did not sting, but stabbed.
Sometimes he stood up for exercise.
The groans of this sick person,' he said, 'distract my attention.
And without that it is extremely difficult to guard against clerical errors in this climate.
The sick man was too ill to groan.
The flies buzzed in a great peace.
Suddenly there was a growing murmur of voices and a great tramping of feet.
A caravan had come in.
A violent babble of uncouth sounds burst out on the other side of the planks.
What a frightful row,' he said.
No, not yet,' he answered, with great composure.
He remained thoughtful for a moment.
He stared at me for a moment with his mild, bulging eyes.
Oh, he will go far, very far,' he began again.
He will be a somebody in the administration before long.
They, above the council in europe, you know mean him to be.
He turned to his work.
The noise outside had ceased, and presently in going out i stopped at the door.
No use telling you much about that.
The population had cleared out a long time ago.
Only here the dwellings were gone, too.
Still i passed through several abandoned villages.
There's something pathetically childish in the ruins of grass walls.
Camp, cook, sleep, strike camp, march.
A great silence around and above.
Was looking after the upkeep of the road, he declared.
I couldn't help asking him once what he meant by coming there at all.
To make money, of course.
As he weighed sixteen stone i had no end of rows with the carriers.
They jibbed, ran away, sneaked off with their loads in the night quite a mutiny.
I felt i was becoming scientifically interesting.
However, all that is to no purpose.
Oh, it was 'all right.
The 'manager himself' was there.
You must,' he said in agitation, 'go and see the general manager at once.
I did not see the real significance of that wreck at once.
I fancy i see it now, but i am not sure not at all.
Certainly the affair was too stupid when i think of it to be altogether natural.
But at the moment it presented itself simply as a confounded nuisance.
I asked myself what i was to do there, now my boat was lost.
I had to set about it the very next day.
That, and the repairs when i brought the pieces to the station, took some months.
My first interview with the manager was curious.
He did not ask me to sit down after my twenty mile walk that morning.
He was commonplace in complexion, in features, in manners, and in voice.
He was of middle size and of ordinary build.
But even at these times the rest of his person seemed to disclaim the intention.
He was a common trader, from his youth up employed in these parts nothing more.
He was obeyed, yet he inspired neither love nor fear, nor even respect.
Not a definite mistrust just uneasiness nothing more.
You have no idea how effective such a... a... faculty can be.
He had no genius for organizing, for initiative, or for order even.
That was evident in such things as the deplorable state of the station.
He had no learning, and no intelligence.
His position had come to him why?
Perhaps because he was never ill...
When he went home on leave he rioted on a large scale pompously.
Jack ashore with a difference in externals only.
This one could gather from his casual talk.
He originated nothing, he could keep the routine going that's all.
He never gave that secret away.
Perhaps there was nothing within him.
Such a suspicion made one pause for out there there were no external checks.
You fancied you had seen things but the seal was on.
This was the station's mess room.
Where he sat was the first place the rest were nowhere.
One felt this to be his unalterable conviction.
He was neither civil nor uncivil.
He began to speak as soon as he saw me.
I had been very long on the road.
Had to start without me.
The up river stations had to be relieved.
I felt weary and irritable.
I interrupted him by saying i had heard of mr. kurtz on the coast.
So they talk of him down there,' he murmured to himself.
He was, he said, 'very, very uneasy.
Certainly he fidgeted on his chair a good deal, exclaimed, 'ah, mr.
Broke the stick of sealing wax and seemed dumfounded by the accident.
Next thing he wanted to know 'how long it would take to'...
Being hungry, you know, and kept on my feet too.
I haven't even seen the wreck yet some months, no doubt.
Well, let us say three months before we can make a start.
That ought to do the affair.
I flung out of his hut muttering to myself my opinion of him.
He was a chattering idiot.
I asked myself sometimes what it all meant.
The word 'ivory' rang in the air, was whispered, was sighed.
You would think they were praying to it.
A taint of imbecile rapacity blew through it all, like a whiff from some corpse.
You see the thing had gone off like a box of matches.
It had been hopeless from the very first.
The flame had leaped high, driven everybody back, lighted up everything and collapsed.
The shed was already a heap of embers glowing fiercely.
A nigger was being beaten near by.
One of the men was the manager.
I wished him a good evening.
Did you ever see anything like it eh?
It is incredible,' he said, and walked off.
As to me, i had hardly ever spoken to him before.
We got into talk, and by and by we strolled away from the hissing ruins.
It seems he could not make bricks without something, i don't know what straw maybe.
An act of special creation perhaps.
Steal a horse straight out.
I couldn't possibly imagine what i had in me to make it worth his while.
It was evident he took me for a perfectly shameless prevaricator.
At last he got angry, and, to conceal a movement of furious annoyance, he yawned.
The background was sombre almost black.
Tell me, pray,' said i, 'who is this mr.
The chief of the inner station,' he answered in a short tone, looking away.
Much obliged,' i said, laughing.
And you are the brickmaker of the central station.
He was silent for a while.
He is a prodigy,' he said at last.
He is an emissary of pity and science and progress, and devil knows what else.
Lots of them,' he replied.
Why ought i to know?
You are of the new gang the gang of virtue.
The same people who sent him specially also recommended you.
I've my own eyes to trust.
My dear aunt's influential acquaintances were producing an unexpected effect upon that young man.
I nearly burst into a laugh.
Do you read the company's confidential correspondence?
He hadn't a word to say.
When mr. kurtz,' i continued, severely, 'is general manager, you won't have the opportunity.
He blew the candle out suddenly, and we went outside.
What a row the brute makes!
Said the indefatigable man with the moustaches, appearing near us.
This will prevent all conflagrations for the future.
Not in bed yet,' he said, with a kind of servile heartiness 'it's so natural.
I went on to the riverside, and the other followed me.
I heard a scathing murmur at my ear, 'heap of muffs go to.
The pilgrims could be seen in knots gesticulating, discussing.
Several had still their staves in their hands.
I verily believe they took these sticks to bed with them.
I felt a hand introducing itself under my arm.
He talked precipitately, and i did not try to stop him.
The smell of mud, of primeval mud, by jove!
All this was great, expectant, mute, while the man jabbered about himself.
What were we who had strayed in here?
Could we handle that dumb thing, or would it handle us?
I had heard enough about it, too god knows!
It makes me miserable and sick, like biting something rotten would do.
He was just a word for me.
I did not see the man in the name any more than you do.
Do you see the story?
We live, as we dream alone....
You see me, whom you know....
It had become so pitch dark that we listeners could hardly see one another.
There was not a word from anybody.
The others might have been asleep, but i was awake.
And there was nothing behind me!
What more did i want?
What i really wanted was rivets, by heaven!
To get on with the work to stop the hole.
There were cases of them down at the coast cases piled up burst split!
Rivets had rolled into the grove of death.
We had plates that would do, but nothing to fasten them with.
Three carriers could have brought all that was wanted to set that steamboat afloat.
There was a way for an intelligent man.
Some even had sat up o' nights for him.
All this energy was wasted, though.
No man you apprehend me?
No man here bears a charmed life.
No influential friend would have served me better.
No, i don't like work.
Your own reality for yourself, not for others what no other man can ever know.
They can only see the mere show, and never can tell what it really means.
This was the foreman a boiler maker by trade a good worker.
He was a lank, bony, yellow faced man, with big intense eyes.
He was an enthusiast and a connoisseur.
He would rave about pigeons.
It had loops to go over his ears.
I slapped him on the back and shouted, 'we shall have rivets!
He scrambled to his feet exclaiming, 'no!
As though he couldn't believe his ears.
Then in a low voice, 'you...
I don't know why we behaved like lunatics.
I put my finger to the side of my nose and nodded mysteriously.
He cried, snapped his fingers above his head, lifting one foot.
We capered on the iron deck.
It must have made some of the pilgrims sit up in their hovels.
I did not know of any reason why we shouldn't.
They'll come in three weeks,' i said confidently.
Instead of rivets there came an invasion, an infliction, a visitation.
I had given up worrying myself about the rivets.
One's capacity for that kind of folly is more limited than you would suppose.
I wasn't very interested in him.
Am i the manager or am i not?
I was ordered to send him there.
I did not move it did not occur to me to move i was sleepy.
It is unpleasant,' grunted the uncle.
Look at the influence that man must have.
It was more than a year ago.
Can you imagine such impudence!
Ivory,' jerked the nephew 'lots of it prime sort lots most annoying, from him.
Invoice,' was the reply fired out, so to speak.
They had been talking about kurtz.
How did that ivory come all this way?
Growled the elder man, who seemed very vexed.
The two fellows there seemed astounded at anybody attempting such a thing.
They were at a loss for an adequate motive.
As to me, i seemed to see kurtz for the first time.
I did not know the motive.
His name, you understand, had not been pronounced once.
The 'scoundrel' had reported that the 'man' had been very ill had recovered imperfectly....
Who was it they were talking about now?
Certainly,' grunted the other 'get him hanged!
Anything anything can be done in this country.
That's what i say nobody here, you understand, here , can endanger your position.
You stand the climate you outlast them all.
The extraordinary series of delays is not my fault.
And he wants to be manager!
I was surprised to see how near they were right under me.
I could have spat upon their hats.
They were looking on the ground, absorbed in thought.
You have been well since you came out this time?
The other gave a start.
Like a charm like a charm.
But the rest oh, my goodness!
Just so,' grunted the uncle.
My boy, trust to this i say, trust to this.
You know the foolish notions that come to one sometimes.
Long afterwards the news came that all the donkeys were dead.
I know nothing as to the fate of the less valuable animals.
They, no doubt, like the rest of us, found what they deserved.
I was then rather excited at the prospect of meeting kurtz very soon.
When i say very soon i mean it comparatively.
An empty stream, a great silence, an impenetrable forest.
The air was warm, thick, heavy, sluggish.
There was no joy in the brilliance of sunshine.
The long stretches of the waterway ran on, deserted, into the gloom of overshadowed distances.
On silvery sand banks hippos and alligators sunned themselves side by side.
And this stillness of life did not in the least resemble a peace.
It was the stillness of an implacable force brooding over an inscrutable intention.
It looked at you with a vengeful aspect.
The inner truth is hidden luckily, luckily.
And indeed what does the price matter, if the trick be well done?
You do your tricks very well.
It's a wonder to me yet.
Imagine a blindfolded man set to drive a van over a bad road.
I sweated and shivered over that business considerably, i can tell you.
No one may know of it, but you never forget the thump eh?
A blow on the very heart.
I don't pretend to say that steamboat floated all the time.
We had enlisted some of these chaps on the way for a crew.
Fine fellows cannibals in their place.
They were men one could work with, and i am grateful to them.
I can sniff it now.
Where the pilgrims imagined it crawled to i don't know.
To some place where they expected to get something.
We penetrated deeper and deeper into the heart of darkness.
It was very quiet there.
Whether it meant war, peace, or prayer we could not tell.
The steamer toiled along slowly on the edge of a black and incomprehensible frenzy.
The prehistoric man was cursing us, praying to us, welcoming us who could tell?
It was unearthly, and the men were no, they were not inhuman.
It would come slowly to one.
What was there after all?
Joy, fear, sorrow, devotion, valour, rage who can tell?
But truth truth stripped of its cloak of time.
He must meet that truth with his own true stuff with his own inborn strength.
Acquisitions, clothes, pretty rags rags that would fly off at the first good shake.
No you want a deliberate belief.
An appeal to me in this fiendish row is there?
Of course, a fool, what with sheer fright and fine sentiments, is always safe.
You wonder i didn't go ashore for a howl and a dance?
There was surface truth enough in these things to save a wiser man.
And between whiles i had to look after the savage who was fireman.
He was an improved specimen he could fire up a vertical boiler.
A few months of training had done for that really fine chap.
When deciphered it said 'wood for you.
There was a signature, but it was illegible not kurtz a much longer word.
We had not done so.
But what and how much?
We commented adversely upon the imbecility of that telegraphic style.
The bush around said nothing, and would not let us look very far, either.
It was an extraordinary find.
I couldn't believe my eyes!
Yes, it looked like cipher.
It was an extravagant mystery.
I slipped the book into my pocket.
I started the lame engine ahead.
He must be english,' i said.
I observed with assumed innocence that no man was safe from trouble in this world.
It was like watching the last flickers of a life.
To keep the eyes so long on one thing was too much for human patience.
The manager displayed a beautiful resignation.
What did it matter what any one knew or ignored?
What did it matter who was manager?
One gets sometimes such a flash of insight.
The reach was narrow, straight, with high sides like a railway cutting.
The current ran smooth and swift, but a dumb immobility sat on the banks.
It was not sleep it seemed unnatural, like a state of trance.
At eight or nine, perhaps, it lifted as a shutter lifts.
A complaining clamour, modulated in savage discords, filled our ears.
The sheer unexpectedness of it made my hair stir under my cap.
Gone, disappeared swept off without leaving a whisper or a shadow behind.
We will be all butchered in this fog,' murmured another.
The faces twitched with the strain, the hands trembled slightly, the eyes forgot to wink.
Several exchanged short, grunting phrases, which seemed to settle the matter to their satisfaction.
I said, just for good fellowship's sake.
I asked 'what would you do with them?
You can see how that worked.
Perhaps i had a little fever, too.
One can't live with one's finger everlastingly on one's pulse.
Was it superstition, disgust, patience, fear or some kind of primitive honour?
It takes a man all his inborn strength to fight hunger properly.
And these chaps, too, had no earthly reason for any kind of scruple.
Two pilgrims were quarrelling in hurried whispers as to which bank.
No, no how can you?
I knew, and he knew, that it was impossible.
Of course i made no move.
I had no mind for a smash up.
You couldn't imagine a more deadly place for a shipwreck.
I authorize you to take all the risks,' he said, after a short silence.
Well, i must defer to your judgment.
You are captain,' he said with marked civility.
How long would it last?
It was the most hopeless lookout.
Will they attack, do you think?
Asked the manager, in a confidential tone.
I did not think they would attack, for several obvious reasons.
The thick fog was one.
The riverside bushes were certainly very thick but the undergrowth behind was evidently penetrable.
They had not the fierce character boding immediate hostile intention.
The glimpse of the steamboat had for some reason filled those savages with unrestrained grief.
I delivered a regular lecture.
It felt like it, too choking, warm, stifling.
Besides, all i said, though it sounded extravagant, was absolutely true to fact.
What we afterwards alluded to as an attack was really an attempt at repulse.
I didn't know either channel, of course.
Above the bush the trees stood in serried ranks.
In this shadow we steamed up very slowly, as you may imagine.
One of my hungry and forbearing friends was sounding in the bows just below me.
This steamboat was exactly like a decked scow.
On the deck, there were two little teakwood houses, with doors and windows.
The boiler was in the fore end, and the machinery right astern.
Over the whole there was a light roof, supported on stanchions.
It had a wide door in front and a broad shutter at each side.
All these were always thrown open, of course.
At night i slept, or tried to, on the couch.
He was the most unstable kind of fool i had ever seen.
He kept hold on it though, and it trailed in the water.
All this time the river, the shore, the woods, were very quiet perfectly quiet.
We cleared the snag clumsily.
We were being shot at!
I stepped in quickly to close the shutter on the landside.
And we were staggering within ten feet of the bank.
Steer her straight,' i said to the helmsman.
I said in a fury.
I might just as well have ordered a tree not to sway in the wind.
I caught sight of a v shaped ripple on the water ahead.
A fusillade burst out under my feet.
The pilgrims had opened with their winchesters, and were simply squirting lead into that bush.
A deuce of a lot of smoke came up and drove slowly forward.
Now i couldn't see the ripple or the snag either.
I stood in the doorway, peering, and the arrows came in swarms.
They might have been poisoned, but they looked as though they wouldn't kill a cat.
The bush began to howl.
The fusillade burst out again.
The manager sends me ' he began in an official tone, and stopped short.
He said, glaring at the wounded man.
We two whites stood over him, and his lustrous and inquiring glance enveloped us both.
The lustre of inquiring glance faded swiftly into vacant glassiness.
I asked the agent eagerly.
To tell you the truth, i was morbidly anxious to change my shoes and socks.
He is dead,' murmured the fellow, immensely impressed.
No doubt about it,' said i, tugging like mad at the shoe laces.
And by the way, i suppose mr. kurtz is dead as well by this time.
For the moment that was the dominant thought.
The man presented himself as a voice.
Not of course that i did not connect him with some sort of action.
That was not the point.
The other shoe went flying unto the devil god of that river.
Mustn't a man ever here, give me some tobacco.
This is the worst of trying to tell....
Now i think of it, it is amazing i did not shed tears.
I am, upon the whole, proud of my fortitude.
Of course i was wrong.
The privilege was waiting for me.
Oh, yes, i heard more than enough.
And i was right, too.
He was very little more than a voice.
Voices, voices even the girl herself now he was silent for a long time.
I laid the ghost of his gifts at last with a lie, he began, suddenly.
Did i mention a girl?
Oh, she is out of it completely.
They the women, i mean are out of it should be out of it.
Oh, she had to be out of it.
You should have heard the disinterred body of mr. kurtz saying, 'my intended.
You would have perceived directly then how completely she was out of it.
And the lofty frontal bone of mr. kurtz!
They say the hair goes on growing sometimes, but this ah specimen, was impressively bald.
He was its spoiled and pampered favourite.
Heaps of it, stacks of it.
The old mud shanty was bursting with it.
Mostly fossil,' the manager had remarked, disparagingly.
We filled the steamboat with it, and had to pile a lot on the deck.
You should have heard him say, 'my ivory.
Oh, yes, i heard him.
My intended, my ivory, my station, my river, my ' everything belonged to him.
Everything belonged to him but that was a trifle.
That was the reflection that made you creepy all over.
It was impossible it was not good for one either trying to imagine.
He had taken a high seat amongst the devils of the land i mean literally.
These little things make all the great difference.
But most of us are neither one nor the other.
Breathe dead hippo, so to speak, and not be contaminated.
And there, don't you see?
This was because it could speak english to me.
His mother was half english, his father was half french.
And he had written it, too.
It was eloquent, vibrating with eloquence, but too high strung, i think.
Seventeen pages of close writing he had found time for!
But it was a beautiful piece of writing.
The opening paragraph, however, in the light of later information, strikes me now as ominous.
From that point he soared and took me with him.
The peroration was magnificent, though difficult to remember, you know.
It gave me the notion of an exotic immensity ruled by an august benevolence.
It made me tingle with enthusiasm.
This was the unbounded power of eloquence of words of burning noble words.
But then, you see, i can't choose.
Whatever he was, he was not common.
It was a kind of partnership.
If he had only left that shutter alone.
He had no restraint, no restraint just like kurtz a tree swayed by the wind.
He was heavy, heavy heavier than any man on earth, i should imagine.
Then without more ado i tipped him overboard.
What they wanted to keep that body hanging about for i can't guess.
But i had also heard another, and a very ominous, murmur on the deck below.
This i did directly the simple funeral was over.
We must have made a glorious slaughter of them in the bush.
He positively danced, the bloodthirsty little gingery beggar.
And he had nearly fainted when he saw the wounded man!
I could not help saying, 'you made a glorious lot of smoke, anyhow.
Upon this they forgot kurtz, and began to howl at me with indignant protests.
He clapped his hands in wonder.
I edged in at once, still going half speed.
The rails, or whatever there had been between, had disappeared.
Of course the forest surrounded all that.
I steamed past prudently, then stopped the engines and let her drift down.
The man on the shore began to shout, urging us to land.
We have been attacked,' screamed the manager.
It's all right,' yelled back the other, as cheerful as you please.
His aspect reminded me of something i had seen something funny i had seen somewhere.
He looked like a harlequin.
He cried 'there's a snag lodged in here last night.
I confess i swore shamefully.
I had nearly holed my cripple, to finish off that charming trip.
The harlequin on the bank turned his little pug nose up to me.
I shouted from the wheel.
The smiles vanished, and he shook his head as if sorry for my disappointment.
His face was like the autumn sky, overcast one moment and bright the next.
I say, i don't like this.
These natives are in the bush,' i said.
He assured me earnestly it was all right.
They are simple people,' he added 'well, i am glad you came.
It took me all my time to keep them off.
But you said it was all right,' i cried.
Then vivaciously, 'my faith, your pilot house wants a clean up!
One good screech will do more for you than all your rifles.
They are simple people,' he repeated.
He rattled away at such a rate he quite overwhelmed me.
Don't you talk with mr.
You don't talk with that man you listen to him,' he exclaimed with severe exaltation.
English tobacco the excellent english tobacco!
Where's a sailor that does not smoke?
He made a point of that.
But when one is young one must see things, gather experience, ideas enlarge the mind.
Here i met mr. kurtz,' he said, youthfully solemn and reproachful.
I held my tongue after that.
I am not so young as i look.
I am twenty five,' he said.
Good old dutchman, van shuyten.
I hope he got it.
And for the rest i don't care.
I had some wood stacked for you.
That was my old house.
I gave him towson's book.
He made as though he would kiss me, but restrained himself.
So many accidents happen to a man going about alone, you know.
You made notes in russian?
I thought they were written in cipher,' i said.
He laughed, then became serious.
I had lots of trouble to keep these people off,' he said.
Did they want to kill you?
He cried, and checked himself.
Why did they attack us?
He hesitated, then said shamefacedly, 'they don't want him to go.
He nodded a nod full of mystery and wisdom.
I tell you,' he cried, 'this man has enlarged my mind.
Iii i looked at him, lost in astonishment.
His very existence was improbable, inexplicable, and altogether bewildering.
He was an insoluble problem.
You take kurtz away quick quick i tell you.
I was seduced into something like admiration like envy.
Glamour urged him on, glamour kept him unscathed.
I almost envied him the possession of this modest and clear flame.
I did not envy him his devotion to kurtz, though.
He had not meditated over it.
It came to him, and he accepted it with a sort of eager fatalism.
We talked of everything,' he said, quite transported at the recollection.
I forgot there was such a thing as sleep.
The night did not seem to last an hour.
Ah, he talked to you of love!
It isn't what you think,' he cried, almost passionately.
He made me see things things.
He threw his arms up.
And, ever since, you have been with him, of course?
It appears their intercourse had been very much broken by various causes.
Ah, it was worth waiting for!
But he had no goods to trade with by that time,' i objected.
There's a good lot of cartridges left even yet,' he answered, looking away.
To speak plainly, he raided the country,' i said.
He muttered something about the villages round that lake.
Kurtz got the tribe to follow him, did he?
They adored him,' he said.
The tone of these words was so extraordinary that i looked at him searchingly.
It was curious to see his mingled eagerness and reluctance to speak of kurtz.
The man filled his life, occupied his thoughts, swayed his emotions.
He could be very terrible.
You can't judge mr. kurtz as you would an ordinary man.
You see i used to shoot game for them.
Well, he wanted it, and wouldn't hear reason.
And it was true, too.
I gave him the ivory.
But i didn't clear out.
I had to be careful, of course, till we got friendly again for a time.
He had his second illness then.
Afterwards i had to keep out of the way but i didn't mind.
He was living for the most part in those villages on the lake.
This man suffered too much.
He hated all this, and somehow he couldn't get away.
Mr. kurtz couldn't be mad.
However he had got much worse suddenly.
Oh, he is bad, very bad.
I directed my glass to the house.
Only one, the first i had made out, was facing my way.
I was not so shocked as you may think.
The start back i had given was really nothing but a movement of surprise.
I had expected to see a knob of wood there, you know.
I am not disclosing any trade secrets.
In fact, the manager said afterwards that mr. kurtz's methods had ruined the district.
Whether he knew of this deficiency himself i can't say.
I think the knowledge came to him at last only at the very last.
It echoed loudly within him because he was hollow at the core....
The admirer of mr. kurtz was a bit crestfallen.
The young man looked at me with surprise.
He forgot i hadn't heard any of these splendid monologues on, what was it?
On love, justice, conduct of life or what not.
I shocked him excessively by laughing.
What would be the next definition i was to hear?
There had been enemies, criminals, workers and these were rebels.
Those rebellious heads looked very subdued to me on their sticks.
I am a simple man.
I have no great thoughts.
I want nothing from anybody.
How can you compare me to...?
His feelings were too much for speech, and suddenly he broke down.
I don't understand,' he groaned.
I've been doing my best to keep him alive, and that's enough.
I had no hand in all this.
A man like this, with such ideas.
Not a living soul was seen on the shore.
The bushes did not rustle.
Kurtz kurtz that means short in german don't it?
Well, the name was as true as everything else in his life and death.
He looked at least seven feet long.
A deep voice reached me faintly.
He must have been shouting.
The manager bent over him murmuring as he walked beside his head.
His hand roamed feebly amongst these papers.
It was not so much the exhaustion of disease.
He did not seem in pain.
Somebody had been writing to him about me.
These special recommendations were turning up again.
It was grave, profound, vibrating, while the man did not seem capable of a whisper.
The russian, eyed curiously by the pilgrims, was staring at the shore.
I followed the direction of his glance.
She must have had the value of several elephant tusks upon her.
She came abreast of the steamer, stood still, and faced us.
Her long shadow fell to the water's edge.
A whole minute passed, and then she made a step forward.
The young fellow by my side growled.
The pilgrims murmured at my back.
A formidable silence hung over the scene.
I don't understand the dialect of this tribe.
I don't understand.... no it's too much for me.
Ah, well, it's all over now.
At this moment i heard kurtz's deep voice behind the curtain 'save me!
Save the ivory, you mean.
Why, i've had to save you.
You are interrupting my plans now.
Not so sick as you would like to believe.
I'll carry my ideas out yet i will return.
I'll show you what can be done.
You with your little peddling notions you are interfering with me.
I....' the manager came out.
He did me the honour to take me under the arm and lead me aside.
He is very low, very low,' he said.
He considered it necessary to sigh, but neglected to be consistently sorrowful.
We have done all we could for him haven't we?
He did not see the time was not ripe for vigorous action.
Cautiously, cautiously that's my principle.
We must be cautious yet.
The district is closed to us for a time.
Upon the whole, the trade will suffer.
I don't deny there is a remarkable quantity of ivory mostly fossil.
Because the method is unsound.
Do you,' said i, looking at the shore, 'call it unsound method?
Without doubt,' he exclaimed hotly.
No method at all,' i murmured after a while.
Shows a complete want of judgment.
It is my duty to point it out in the proper quarter.
Oh,' said i, 'that fellow what's his name?
The brickmaker, will make a readable report for you.
He appeared confounded for a moment.
Nevertheless i think mr. kurtz is a remarkable man,' i said with emphasis.
But it was something to have at least a choice of nightmares.
The russian tapped me on the shoulder.
Said i at last, 'speak out.
As it happens, i am mr. kurtz's friend in a way.
The manager thinks you ought to be hanged.
He showed a concern at this intelligence which amused me at first.
I had better get out of the way quietly,' he said earnestly.
I can do no more for kurtz now, and they would soon find some excuse.
There's a military post three hundred miles from here.
They are simple people and i want nothing, you know.
Kurtz's reputation is safe with me.
I did not know how truly i spoke.
He hated sometimes the idea of being taken away and then again....
But i don't understand these matters.
I could not stop him.
Oh, i had an awful time of it this last month.
He is all right now.
Ye e es,' he muttered, not very convinced apparently.
Thanks,' said i 'i shall keep my eyes open.
I have a canoe and three black fellows waiting not very far.
Could you give me a few martini henry cartridges?
I could, and did, with proper secrecy.
He helped himself, with a wink at me, to a handful of my tobacco.
Between sailors you know good english tobacco.
The soles were tied with knotted strings sandalwise under his bare feet.
He seemed to think himself excellently well equipped for a renewed encounter with the wilderness.
I'll never, never meet such a man again.
He rolled his eyes at the recollection of these delights.
Oh, he enlarged my mind!
He shook hands and vanished in the night.
I glanced casually into the little cabin.
A light was burning within, but mr. kurtz was not there.
I think i would have raised an outcry if i had believed my eyes.
But i didn't believe them at first the thing seemed so impossible.
What made this emotion so overpowering was how shall i define it?
It pacified me, in fact, so much that i did not raise an alarm.
The grass was wet with dew.
I strode rapidly with clenched fists.
I had some imbecile thoughts.
Such silly things you know.
I kept to the track though then stopped to listen.
I thought i could see a kind of motion ahead of me.
I was strangely cocksure of everything that night.
I was circumventing kurtz as though it had been a boyish game.
It was by no means over yet.
Suppose he began to shout?
Though he could hardly stand, there was still plenty of vigour in his voice.
Go away hide yourself,' he said, in that profound tone.
We were within thirty yards from the nearest fire.
It had horns antelope horns, i think on its head.
Some sorcerer, some witch man, no doubt it looked fiendlike enough.
Do you know what you are doing?
If he makes a row we are lost,' i thought to myself.
You will be lost,' i said 'utterly lost.
One gets sometimes such a flash of inspiration, you know.
I had immense plans,' he muttered irresolutely.
I will throttle you for good,' i corrected myself.
There was nothing either above or below him, and i knew it.
He had kicked himself loose of the earth.
He had kicked the very earth to pieces.
If anybody ever struggled with a soul, i am the man.
And i wasn't arguing with a lunatic either.
But his soul was mad.
Being alone in the wilderness, it had looked within itself, and, by heavens!
I tell you, it had gone mad.
He struggled with himself, too.
I saw it i heard it.
We had carried kurtz into the pilot house there was more air there.
Lying on the couch, he stared through the open shutter.
Don't you frighten them away,' cried some one on deck disconsolately.
I pulled the string time after time.
The pilgrims looked upon me with disfavour.
I was, so to speak, numbered with the dead.
It rang deep to the very last.
Sometimes he was contemptibly childish.
Of course you must take care of the motives right motives always.
Close the shutter,' said kurtz suddenly one day 'i can't bear to look at this.
Oh, but i will wring your heart yet!
He cried at the invisible wilderness.
This delay was the first thing that shook kurtz's confidence.
Keep this for me,' he said.
This noxious fool' 'is capable of prying into my boxes when i am not looking.
In the afternoon i saw him.
His was an impenetrable darkness.
The light was within a foot of his eyes.
I forced myself to murmur, 'oh, nonsense!
And stood over him as if transfixed.
It was as though a veil had been rent.
I blew the candle out and left the cabin.
All the pilgrims rushed out to see.
I remained, and went on with my dinner.
I believe i was considered brutally callous.
However, i did not eat much.
What else had been there?
And then they very nearly buried me.
However, as you see, i did not go to join kurtz there and then.
Droll thing life is that mysterious arrangement of merciless logic for a futile purpose.
I have wrestled with death.
It is the most unexciting contest you can imagine.
This is the reason why i affirm that kurtz was a remarkable man.
He had something to say.
He had summed up he had judged.
He was a remarkable man.
It is his extremity that i seem to have lived through.
Better his cry much better.
But it was a victory!
They trespassed upon my thoughts.
I daresay i was not very well at that time.
My dear aunt's endeavours to 'nurse up my strength' seemed altogether beside the mark.
It was not my strength that wanted nursing, it was my imagination that wanted soothing.
His mother had died lately, watched over, as i was told, by his intended.
He invoked then the name of science.
It would be an incalculable loss if,' etc., etc.
This is not what we had a right to expect,' he remarked.
Expect nothing else,' i said.
There are only private letters.
Incidentally he gave me to understand that kurtz had been essentially a great musician.
How that man could talk.
He had faith don't you see?
He could get himself to believe anything anything.
He would have been a splendid leader of an extreme party.
Any party,' answered the other.
He was an an extremist.
Did i not think so?
She struck me as beautiful i mean she had a beautiful expression.
She seemed ready to listen without mental reservation, without suspicion, without a thought for herself.
I concluded i would go and give her back her portrait and those letters myself.
Yes and also some other feeling perhaps.
I had no clear perception of what it was i really wanted.
The company did not pay for it.
I collected it myself at a very great personal risk.
I am afraid they will try to claim it as theirs though.
It is a difficult case.
What do you think i ought to do resist?
I want no more than justice.'...
He wanted no more than justice no more than justice.
I seemed to hear the whispered cry, the horror!
The bent gilt legs and backs of the furniture shone in indistinct curves.
The tall marble fireplace had a cold and monumental whiteness.
A high door opened closed.
She took both my hands in hers and murmured, 'i had heard you were coming.
I noticed she was not very young i mean not girlish.
She had a mature capacity for fidelity, for belief, for suffering.
Their glance was guileless, profound, confident, and trustful.
For her he had died only yesterday.
I saw them together i heard them together.
She motioned me to a chair.
Intimacy grows quickly out there,' i said.
I knew him as well as it is possible for one man to know another.
And you admired him,' she said.
It was impossible to know him and not to admire him.
He was a remarkable man,' i said, unsteadily.
But when you think that no one knew him so well as i!
I had all his noble confidence.
You knew him best,' i repeated.
You were his friend,' she went on.
His friend,' she repeated, a little louder.
You must have been, if he had given you this, and sent you to me.
I feel i can speak to you and oh!
I was not even sure whether he had given me the right bundle.
I had heard that her engagement with kurtz had been disapproved by her people.
He wasn't rich enough or something.
And indeed i don't know whether he had not been a pauper all his life.
... who was not his friend who had heard him speak once?
He drew men towards him by what was best in them.
She looked at me with intensity.
But you have heard him!
What a loss to me to us!
She corrected herself with beautiful generosity then added in a murmur, 'to the world.
I have been very happy very fortunate very proud,' she went on.
Too happy for a little while.
And now i am unhappy for for life.
You and i ' 'we shall always remember him,' i said hastily.
You know what vast plans he had.
I knew of them, too i could not perhaps understand but others knew of them.
His words, at least, have not died.
His words will remain,' i said.
And his example,' she whispered to herself.
Men looked up to him his goodness shone in every act.
His example ' 'true,' i said 'his example, too.
I cannot i cannot believe not yet.
I saw him clearly enough then.
She said suddenly very low, 'he died as he lived.
And i was not with him,' she murmured.
My anger subsided before a feeling of infinite pity.
Everything that could be done ' i mumbled.
I would have treasured every sigh, every word, every sign, every glance.
I felt like a chill grip on my chest.
Don't,' i said, in a muffled voice.
I think of his loneliness.
Nobody near to understand him as i would have understood.
Perhaps no one to hear....' 'to the very end,' i said, shakily.
I heard his very last words....' i stopped in a fright.
Repeat them,' she murmured in a heart broken tone.
I want i want something something to to live with.
I was on the point of crying at her, 'don't you hear them?
His last word to live with,' she insisted.
Don't you understand i loved him i loved him i loved him!
I pulled myself together and spoke slowly.
The last word he pronounced was your name.
I knew it i was sure!'...
I heard her weeping she had hidden her face in her hands.
The heavens do not fall for such a trifle.
Hadn't he said he wanted only justice?
I could not tell her.
Nobody moved for a time.
We have lost the first of the ebb, said the director suddenly.
Theodore alois buckley, m.a., f.s.a.
Pope’s preface to the iliad of homer book i.
Illustrations homer invoking the muse.
Minerva repressing the fury of achilles.
The departure of briseis from the tent of achilles.
Thetis calling briareus to the assistance of jupiter.
Thetis entreating jupiter to honour achilles.
Jupiter sending the evil dream to agamemnon.
Venus, disguised, inviting helen to the chamber of paris.
Venus presenting helen to paris.
Map, titled graeciae antiquae .
The council of the gods.
Map of the plain of troy.
Venus, wounded in the hand, conducted by iris to mars.
Otus and ephialtes holding mars captive.
Diomed casting his spear at mars.
The meeting of hector and andromache.
Hector and ajax separated by the heralds.
Juno and minerva going to assist the greeks.
The hours taking the horses from juno’s car.
Diomed and ulysses returning with the spoils of rhesus.
Neptune rising from the sea.
Sleep escaping from the wrath of jupiter.
Ajax defending the greek ships.
Sleep and death conveying the body of sarpedon to lycia.
Fight for the body of patroclus.
Vulcan from an antique gem.
Thetis ordering the nereids to descend into the sea.
Juno commanding the sun to set.
Thetis and eurynome receiving the infant vulcan.
Vulcan and charis receiving thetis.
Thetis bringing the armour to achilles.
The gods descending to battle.
Achilles contending with the rivers.
Andromache fainting on the wall.
The funeral pile of patroclus.
Hector’s body at the car of achilles.
Iris advises priam to obtain the body of hector.
Scepticism is as much the result of knowledge, as knowledge is of scepticism.
Consistency is no less pertinacious and exacting in its demands.
In brief, to write a history, we must know more than mere facts.
Among the immigrants was menapolus, the son of ithagenes.
Although poor, he married, and the result of the union was a girl named critheis.
Phemius died, leaving him sole heir to his property, and his mother soon followed.
Here his misfortunes and poetical talent gained him the friendship of one tychias, an armourer.
At phocoea, homer was destined to experience another literary distress.
This at once determined him to set out for chios.
The dogs barked on his approach, and he cried out.
Whereupon homer addressed glaucus thus o glaucus, my friend, prythee attend to my behest.
Glaucus was pleased with the advice, and marvelled at its author.
However, he bade him bring the stranger to him.
She is represented, as usual, sitting.
The chair has a lion carved on each side, and on the back.
The area is bounded by a low rim, or seat, and about five yards over.
So successful was this school, that homer realised a considerable fortune.
He also testifies his gratitude to phemius, who had given him both sustenance and instruction.
We are perpetually labouring to destroy our delights, our composure, our devotion to superior power.
Of all the animals on earth we least know what is good for us.
My opinion is, that what is best for us is our admiration of good.
No man living venerates homer more than i do.
There is some truth, though some malicious exaggeration, in the lines of pope.
For whom was a written iliad necessary?
Even the few passages which relate to their ancestors, mr. knight suspects to be interpolations.
Moreover, he continues, the whole tenor of the poems themselves confirms what is here remarked.
But what was passing around them?
Then followed a species of recitative, probably with an intoned burden.
Tune next followed, as it aided the memory considerably.
The minutiae of verbal criticism i am far from seeking to despise.
Grammarians are not poets by profession, but may be so per accidens.
One rejects what another considers the turning point of his theory.
One cuts a supposed knot by expunging what another would explain by omitting something else.
There is a catholicity, so to speak, in the very name of homer.
What consistency of style and execution can be hoped for from such an attempt?
Or, rather, what bad taste and tedium will not be the infallible result?
No poet has ever, as a poet, exercised a similar influence over his countrymen.
Pope was not a grecian.
And in those days, what is called literal translation was less cultivated than at present.
They pour along like a fire that sweeps the whole earth before it.
Fable may be divided into the probable, the allegorical, and the marvellous.
The marvellous fable includes whatever is supernatural, and especially the machines of the gods.
The single quality of courage is wonderfully diversified in the several characters of the iliad.
It would be endless to produce instances of these kinds.
Everything in it has manner , that is, everything is acted or spoken.
Homer makes us hearers, and virgil leaves us readers.
Longinus has given his opinion, that it was in this part homer principally excelled.
Duport, in his gnomologia homerica, has collected innumerable instances of this sort.
If we observe his descriptions, images, and similes, we shall find the invention still predominant.
It is, indeed, the strongest and most glowing imaginable, and touched with the greatest spirit.
As a metaphor is a short simile, one of these epithets is a short description.
Thus on whatever side we contemplate homer, what principally strikes us is his invention.
Homer was the greater genius, virgil the better artist.
In one we most admire the man, in the other the work.
When we behold their battles, methinks the two poets resemble the heroes they celebrate.
The reader will easily extend this observation to more objections of the same kind.
As for the epithets of great men, mons.
This is the method of mons.
What he has done admitted no increase, it only left room for contraction or regulation.
Simplicity is the mean between ostentation and rusticity.
I speak of his compound epithets, and of his repetitions.
It only remains to speak of the versification.
Upon the whole, i must confess myself utterly incapable of doing justice to homer.
We have only those of chapman, hobbes, and ogilby.
His poetry, as well as ogilby’s, is too mean for criticism.
Swift promoted my interest with that warmth with which he always serves his friend.
In short, i have found more patrons than ever homer wanted.
The scene lies in the grecian camp, then changes to chrysa, and lastly to olympus.
Achilles’ wrath, to greece the direful spring of woes unnumber’d, heavenly goddess, sing!
For chryses sought with costly gifts to gain his captive daughter from the victor’s chain.
May your vows be crown’d, and troy’s proud walls lie level with the ground.
Illustration homer invoking the muse.
The trembling priest along the shore return’d, and in the anguish of a father mourn’d.
Whom tenedos adores, and whose bright presence gilds thy chrysa’s shores.
Thy shafts employ, avenge thy servant, and the greeks destroy.
The favouring power attends, and from olympus’ lofty tops descends.
Breathing revenge, a sudden night he spread, and gloomy darkness roll’d about his head.
So heaven, atoned, shall dying greece restore, and phoebus dart his burning shafts no more.
Would’st thou know why angry phoebus bends his fatal bow?
To whom pelides from thy inmost soul speak what thou know’st, and speak without control.
Denouncing mischief still, prophet of plagues, for ever boding ill!
For this are phoebus’ oracles explored, to teach the greeks to murmur at their lord?
The prize, the beauteous prize, i will resign, so dearly valued, and so justly mine.
Insatiate king , fond of the power, but fonder of the prize!
At thy demand shall i restore the maid?
But this when time requires.
At this, pelides, frowning stern, replied o tyrant, arm’d with insolence and pride!
Inglorious slave to interest, ever join’d with fraud, unworthy of a royal mind!
What cause have i to war at thy decree?
A prize as small, o tyrant!
Match’d with thine, as thy own actions if compared to mine.
To this the king fly, mighty warrior!
Fly thy aid we need not, and thy threats defy.
Thy valour is from god.
Then let those eyes that view the daring crime, behold the vengeance too.
The force of keen reproaches let him feel but sheathe, obedient, thy revenging steel.
Then let revenge no longer bear the sway command thy passions, and the gods obey.
To her pelides with regardful ear, ’tis just, o goddess!
The goddess swift to high olympus flies, and joins the sacred senate of the skies.
Mix’d of insolence and fear, thou dog in forehead, but in heart a deer!
Scourge of thy people, violent and base!
With like disdain the raging king return’d his frowns again.
What joy to troy’s proud monarch, and the friends of troy!
That adverse gods commit to stern debate the best, the bravest, of the grecian state.
Let both unite with well consenting mind, so shall authority with strength be join’d.
To calm achilles’ rage rule thou thyself, as more advanced in age.
Achilles should be lost, the pride of greece, and bulwark of our host.
The king of men replies thy years are awful, and thy words are wise.
But that imperious, that unconquer’d soul, no laws can limit, no respect control.
Him must our hosts, our chiefs, ourself obey?
What king can bear a rival in his sway?
At this they ceased the stern debate expired the chiefs in sullen majesty retired.
Achilles with patroclus took his way where near his tents his hollow vessels lay.
The host to expiate next the king prepares, with pure lustrations, and with solemn prayers.
The army thus in sacred rites engaged, atrides still with deep resentment raged.
To wait his will two sacred heralds stood, talthybius and eurybates the good.
Patroclus, haste, the fair briseis bring conduct my captive to the haughty king.
But witness, heralds, and proclaim my vow, witness to gods above, and men below!
Illustration the departure of briseis from the tent of achilles.
Thy anguish let me share reveal the cause, and trust a parent’s care.
Was led, by vote selected, to the general’s bed.
Thou thy suppliant son attend.
Illustration thetis calling briareus to the assistance of jupiter.
And fill’d with sorrow too!
Too nearly threats my son.
Yet to move thy suit i’ll go to great olympus crown’d with fleecy snow.
Meantime, secure within thy ships, from far behold the field, not mingle in the war.
Then will i mount the brazen dome, and move the high tribunal of immortal jove.
Next on the shore their hecatomb they land chryseis last descending on the strand.
Avert the wasteful woe, and smile propitious, and unbend thy bow.
The priest himself before his altar stands, and burns the offering with his holy hands.
If e’er, o father of the gods!
Avenge this wrong, o ever just and wise!
Illustration thetis entreating jupiter to honour achilles.
Thus thetis spoke but jove in silence held the sacred counsels of his breast conceal’d.
O sire of gods and men!
Thy suppliant hear refuse, or grant for what has jove to fear?
Declare, of all the powers above, is wretched thetis least the care of jove?
Say, artful manager of heaven , who now partakes the secrets of the skies?
Thy juno knows not the decrees of fate, in vain the partner of imperial state.
What favourite goddess then those cares divides, which jove in prudence from his consort hides?
What fatal favour has the goddess won, to grace her fierce, inexorable son?
The thunderer spoke, nor durst the queen reply a reverent horror silenced all the sky.
If you submit, the thunderer stands appeased the gracious power is willing to be pleased.
Illustration the apotheosis of homer.
The trial of the army, and catalogue of the forces.
They are detained by the management of ulysses, who chastises the insolence of thersites.
The time employed in this book consists not entirely of one day.
Declare, e’en now ’tis given him to destroy the lofty towers of wide extended troy.
Destruction hangs o’er yon devoted wall, and nodding ilion waits the impending fall.
Illustration jupiter sending the evil dream to agamemnon.
Canst thou, with all a monarch’s cares oppress’d, o atreus’ son!
’tis jove’s command i bear thou, and thy glory, claim his heavenly care.
’tis given thee to destroy the lofty towers of wide extended troy.
Awake, but waking this advice approve, and trust the vision that descends from jove.
Eager he rises, and in fancy hears the voice celestial murmuring in his ears.
With attentive ear receive my words, and credit what you hear.
’tis jove’s command i bear, thou and thy glory claim his heavenly care.
This hear observant, and the gods obey!’ the vision spoke, and pass’d in air away.
Since heaven itself alarms, unite, and rouse the sons of greece to arms.
This warning should be lost!
Fame flies before the messenger of jove, and shining soars, and claps her wings above.
So jove decrees, resistless lord of all!
Haste, then, for ever leave the trojan wall!
His deep design unknown, the hosts approve atrides’ speech.
And leave unpunish’d this perfidious race?
And bravest chiefs, in helen’s quarrel slain, lie unrevenged on yon detested plain?
No let my greeks, unmoved by vain alarms, once more refulgent shine in brazen arms.
The flying host detain, nor let one sail be hoisted on the main.
Pallas obeys, and from olympus’ height swift to the ships precipitates her flight.
Shall beauteous helen still remain unfreed, still unrevenged, a thousand heroes bleed!
Prevent the shame, recall your armies, and your chiefs reclaim.
Your own resistless eloquence employ, and to the immortals trust the fall of troy.
Warriors like you, with strength and wisdom bless’d, by brave examples should confirm the rest.
The monarch’s will not yet reveal’d appears he tries our courage, but resents our fears.
The unwary greeks his fury may provoke not thus the king in secret council spoke.
Jove loves our chief, from jove his honour springs, beware!
For dreadful is the wrath of kings.
Ye gods, what dastards would our host command!
Swept to the war, the lumber of a land.
Be silent, wretch, and think not here allow’d that worst of tyrants, an usurping crowd.
Amidst the glories of so bright a reign, what moves the great atrides to complain?
’tis thine whate’er the warrior’s breast inflames, the golden spoil, and thine the lovely dames.
Thus at full ease in heaps of riches roll’d, what grieves the monarch?
Is it thirst of gold?
But safer plunder thy own host supplies say, wouldst thou seize some valiant leader’s prize?
Oh women of achaia men no more!
Have we not known thee, slave!
Of all our host, the man who acts the least, upbraids the most?
But grant the host with wealth the general load, except detraction, what hast thou bestow’d?
What wonders has ulysses wrought!
What fruits his conduct and his courage yield!
Great in the council, glorious in the field.
The expecting crowds in still attention hung, to hear the wisdom of his heavenly tongue.
Whom the grecian race with shame deserting, heap with vile disgrace.
Not such at argos was their generous vow once all their voice, but ah!
Behold them weeping for their native shore what could their wives or helpless children more?
Not for their grief the grecian host i blame but vanquish’d!
Expect the time to troy’s destruction given.
And try the faith of chalcas and of heaven.
This wondrous signal jove himself displays, of long, long labours, but eternal praise.
With submission wait, nor let your flight avert the trojan fate.
He said the shores with loud applauses sound, the hollow ships each deafening shout rebound.
Then nestor thus these vain debates forbear, ye talk like children, not like heroes dare.
Where now are all your high resolves at last?
Your leagues concluded, your engagements past?
While useless words consume the unactive hours, no wonder troy so long resists our powers.
And with courage sway we march to war, if thou direct the way.
And hoist his sail to fly, and die the dastard first, who dreads to die.
But now, ye warriors, take a short repast and, well refresh’d, to bloody conflict haste.
In hector’s breast be plunged this shining sword, and slaughter’d heroes groan around their lord!
Their prayers perform’d the chiefs the rite pursue, the barley sprinkled, and the victim slew.
The limbs they sever from the inclosing hide, the thighs, selected to the gods, divide.
Soon as the rage of hunger was suppress’d, the generous nestor thus the prince address’d.
Each leader now his scatter’d force conjoins in close array, and forms the deepening lines.
Say, virgins, seated round the throne divine, all knowing goddesses!
To count them all, demands a thousand tongues, a throat of brass, and adamantine lungs.
Twice twenty ships transport the warlike bands, which bold elphenor, fierce in arms, commands.
Full fifty more from athens stem the main, led by menestheus through the liquid plain.
No chief like thee, menestheus!
Nestor alone, improved by length of days, for martial conduct bore an equal praise.
Whose unsuccessful pride the immortal muses in their art defied.
Bold agapenor, glorious at their head, the mighty squadron led.
In separate squadrons these their train divide, each leads ten vessels through the yielding tide.
Ulysses follow’d through the watery road, a chief, in wisdom equal to a god.
These in twelve galleys with vermilion prores, beneath his conduct sought the phrygian shores.
The glories of the mighty race were fled!
Oeneus himself, and meleager dead!
To thoas’ care now trust the martial train, his forty vessels follow through the main.
These march’d, idomeneus, beneath thy care, and merion, dreadful as the god of war.
Sweet pyrrhasus, with blooming flowerets crown’d, and antron’s watery dens, and cavern’d ground.
His forces medon led from lemnos’ shore, oileus’ son, whom beauteous rhena bore.
To these his skill their parent god imparts, divine professors of the healing arts.
The bold ormenian and asterian bands in forty barks eurypylus commands.
Where titan hides his hoary head in snow, and where hyperia’s silver fountains flow.
In twenty sail the bold perrhaebians came from cyphus, guneus was their leader’s name.
From the dark abodes styx pours them forth, the dreadful oath of gods!
Of all achaia breeds, who bravest fought, or rein’d the noblest steeds?
In this dissembled form, she hastes to bring the unwelcome message to the phrygian king.
Cease to consult, the time for action calls war, horrid war, approaches to your walls!
The voice divine the mighty chief alarms the council breaks, the warriors rush to arms.
The sire forewarn’d in vain, they rush’d to war, and perish’d on the plain.
With great euphemus the ciconians move, sprung from troezenian ceus, loved by jove.
Phorcys and brave ascanius here unite the ascanian phrygians, eager for the fight.
The duel of menelaus and paris.
Iris is sent to call helen to behold the fight.
The kings on either part take the solemn oath for the conditions of the combat.
She then calls helen from the walls, and brings the lovers together.
The three and twentieth day still continues throughout this book.
The scene is sometimes in the fields before troy, and sometimes in troy itself.
How the scornful greeks exult to see their fears of danger undeceived in thee!
Then thus the monarch, great atrides, cried forbear, ye warriors!
Awed by his high command the greeks attend, the tumult silence, and the fight suspend.
Your shining swords within the sheath restrain, and pitch your lances in the yielding plain.
Let these the brave triumphant victor grace, and different nations part in leagues of peace.
While a third we bring select to jove, the inviolable king.
The nations hear with rising hopes possess’d, and peaceful prospects dawn in every breast.
Two heralds now, despatch’d to troy, invite the phrygian monarch to the peaceful rite.
Talthybius hastens to the fleet, to bring the lamb for jove, the inviolable king.
Her handmaids, clymene and æthra, wait her silent footsteps to the scaean gate.
She moves a goddess, and she looks a queen!
Yet hence, o heaven, convey that fatal face, and from destruction save the trojan race.
That still he bore a brother’s name!
Born to prosperous fate, successful monarch of a mighty state!
Of your matchless train what numbers lost, what numbers yet remain!
But far inferior those, in martial grace, and strength of numbers, to this grecian race.
Broad is his breast, his shoulders larger spread, though great atrides overtops his head.
Erect, the spartan most engaged our view ulysses seated, greater reverence drew.
Ajax the great, himself a host the grecian strength and pride.
Bold idomeneus superior towers amid yon circle of his cretan powers, great as a god!
I saw him once before, with menelaus on the spartan shore.
Meantime the heralds, through the crowded town.
Bring the rich wine and destined victims down.
Whom all obey, who high on ida’s holy mountain sway, eternal jove!
And all ye living floods!
While thus their prayers united mount the sky, hear, mighty jove!
And hear, ye gods on high!
Thus either host their imprecations join’d, which jove refused, and mingled with the wind.
Let division cease, and joyful nations join in leagues of peace.
Both armies sat the combat to survey.
Beside each chief his azure armour lay, and round the lists the generous coursers neigh.
Let this example future times reclaim, and guard from wrong fair friendship’s holy name.
And is it thus the gods assist the just?
When crimes provoke us, heaven success denies the dart falls harmless, and the falchion flies.
And woman’s frailty always to believe!
For whom must helen break her second vow?
What other paris is thy darling now?
Illustration venus presenting helen to paris.
Thus having spoke, the enamour’d phrygian boy rush’d to the bed, impatient for the joy.
Him helen follow’d slow with bashful charms, and clasp’d the blooming hero in her arms.
Then speaking thus, the king of kings arose, ye trojans, dardans, all our generous foes!
Illustration map, titled graeciae antiquae .
The breach of the truce, and the first battle.
In the meantime some of the trojan troops attack the greeks.
Nestor is particularly celebrated for his military discipline.
The battle joins, and great numbers are slain on both sides.
The same day continues through this as through the last book .
The scene is wholly in the field before troy.
Her act has rescued paris’ forfeit life, though great atrides gain’d the glorious strife.
What signal issue waits to crown this deed, and finish all the fates!
Shall then, o tyrant of the ethereal reign!
My schemes, my labours, and my hopes be vain?
Have i, for this, shook ilion with alarms, assembled nations, set two worlds in arms?
At length ripe vengeance o’er their heads impends, but jove himself the faithless race defends.
Oh insatiate hate to phrygia’s monarch, and the phrygian state!
What high offence has fired the wife of jove?
No mortals merit more distinguish’d grace than godlike priam, or than priam’s race.
Still to our name their hecatombs expire, and altars blaze with unextinguish’d fire.
Of power superior why should i complain?
Resent i may, but must resent in vain.
They said, while pallas through the trojan throng, pass’d disguised along.
Like bold laodocus, her course she bent, who from antenor traced his high descent.
To him the goddess phrygian!
Canst thou hear a well timed counsel with a willing ear?
Show’d thy sacred blood, as down thy snowy thigh distill’d the streaming flood.
Did i for this agree the solemn truce, a fatal truce to thee!
Such mighty woes on perjured princes wait but thou, alas!
Lo his proud vessels scatter’d o’er the main, and unrevenged, his mighty brother slain.’ oh!
Ere that dire disgrace shall blast my fame, o’erwhelm me, earth!
And hide a monarch’s shame.
On foot through all the martial ranks he moves and these encourages, and those reproves.
What thanks we owe to worth like thine!
What praise shall we bestow?
To thee the foremost honours are decreed, first in the fight and every graceful deed.
Be still thyself, in arms a mighty name maintain thy honours, and enlarge thy fame.
To whom the cretan thus his speech address’d secure of me, o king!
The field shall prove how perjuries succeed, and chains or death avenge the impious deed.
Alastor, chromius, haemon, round him wait, bias the good, and pelagon the great.
So spoke the master of the martial art, and touch’d with transport great atrides’ heart.
But wasting years, that wither human race, exhaust thy spirits, and thy arms unbrace.
What once thou wert, oh ever mightst thou be!
And age the lot of any chief but thee.
And fears ulysses, skill’d in every art?
Why stand you distant, and the rest expect to mix in combat which yourselves neglect?
Without a blush survey whole troops before you labouring in the fray?
Say, is it thus those honours you requite?
The first in banquets, but the last in fight.
Behold we stand sheathed in bright arms, and but expect command.
If glorious deeds afford thy soul delight, behold me plunging in the thickest fight.
Canst thou, remote, the mingling hosts descry, with hands unactive, and a careless eye?
How the son degenerates from the sire!
This invidious praise, ourselves to lessen, while our sire you raise?
Dare to be just, atrides!
And confess our value equal, though our fury less.
Far more than heirs of all our parents’ fame, our glories darken their diminish’d name.
Dire was the clang, and dreadful from afar, of arm’d tydides rushing to the war.
By dreadful ajax slain, he falls, and renders all their cares in vain!
He drops the corpse of simoisius slain, and sinks a breathless carcase on the plain.
A chief stood nigh, who from abydos came, old priam’s son, democoon was his name.
Have ye forgot what seem’d your dread before?
The great, the fierce achilles fights no more.
Then great diores fell, by doom divine, in vain his valour and illustrious line.
Stern thoas, glaring with revengeful eyes, in sullen fury slowly quits the prize.
So fought each host, with thirst of glory fired, and crowds on crowds triumphantly expired.
Illustration map of the plain of troy.
Diomed, assisted by pallas, performs wonders in this day’s battle.
Mars rallies the trojans, and assists hector to make a stand.
The first battle continues through this book.
The scene is the same as in the former.
Seized with unusual fear, idaeus fled, left the rich chariot, and his brother dead.
The steeds and chariot, to the navy led, increased the spoils of gallant diomed.
By whom the mighty fall, who bathe in blood, and shake the lofty wall!
In dust the mighty halizonian lay, his arms resound, the spirit wings its way.
Thy fate was next, o phaestus!
Next artful phereclus untimely fell bold merion sent him to the realms of hell.
Thy father’s skill, o phereclus!
The hapless artist, while confused he fled, the spear of merion mingled with the dead.
Thus toil’d the chiefs, in different parts engaged.
So raged tydides, boundless in his ire, drove armies back, and made all troy retire.
If venus mingle in the martial band, her shalt thou wound so pallas gives command.
Whoe’er he be, propitiate jove with prayer if man, destroy if god, entreat to spare.
My rashness i deplore these shafts, once fatal, carry death no more.
Tydeus’ and atreus’ sons their points have found, and undissembled gore pursued the wound.
In vain they bleed this unavailing bow serves, not to slaughter, but provoke the foe.
To whom the leader of the dardan race be calm, nor phoebus’ honour’d gift disgrace.
As thine the steeds, be thine the task to guide.
Enough is given to fame.
And save a life, the bulwark of our war.
Me wouldst thou move to base, inglorious flight?
Though late in vain assail’d, the spear may enter where the arrow fail’d.
Our triumph now, the mighty warrior lies!
The greeks with longing eyes behold at distance, but forbear the prize.
The goddess, seized with dread, confused, distracted, from the conflict fled.
The queen of love with faded charms she found.
Pale was her cheek, and livid look’d the wound.
Illustration venus, wounded in the hand, conducted by iris to mars.
Behold the deed of haughty diomed!
’twas in the son’s defence the mother bled.
The war with troy no more the grecians wage but with the gods engage.
To stain the bless’d abodes, and drench his arrows in the blood of gods!
Illustration otus and ephialtes holding mars captive.
This said, she wiped from venus’ wounded palm the sacred ichor, and infused the balm.
O son of tydeus, cease!
Be wise and see how vast the difference of the gods and thee distance immense!
Between the powers that shine above, eternal, deathless, and divine, and mortal man!
A wretch of humble birth, a short lived reptile in the dust of earth.
Around the spectre bloody wars are waged, and greece and troy with clashing shields engaged.
To hell’s abhorr’d abodes despatch yon greek, and vindicate the gods.
Will ye fly, and unrevenged see priam’s people die?
Still unresisted shall the foe destroy, and stretch the slaughter to the gates of troy?
He said new courage swell’d each hero’s heart.
Remote they stand while alien troops engage, like trembling hounds before the lion’s rage.
Stung to the heart the generous hector hears, but just reproof with decent silence bears.
Stern diomed with either ajax stood, and great ulysses, bathed in hostile blood.
Embodied close, the labouring grecian train the fiercest shock of charging hosts sustain.
Unmoved and silent, the whole war they wait serenely dreadful, and as fix’d as fate.
The charge of battle bear your brave associates and yourselves revere!
He got orsilochus, diocleus he, and these descended in the third degree.
First, pylaemenes, great in battle, bled, who sheathed in brass the paphlagonians led.
Tydides paused amidst his full career then first the hero’s manly breast knew fear.
Behold where mars in mortal arms appears!
Retire then, warriors, but sedate and slow retire, but with your faces to the foe.
Sheathed in bright arms each adverse chief came on.
Jove’s great descendant, and his greater son.
But what art thou, who deedless look’st around, while unrevenged thy lycians bite the ground!
Pierced by my spear, to endless darkness go!
I make this present to the shades below.
The son of hercules, the rhodian guide, thus haughty spoke.
The lycian king replied thy sire, o prince!
Nor so content, the generous chief defied, with base reproaches and unmanly pride.
Borne from the conflict by his lycian throng, the wounded hero dragg’d the lance along.
Shall faithless troy prevail, and shall our promise to our people fail?
At her command rush forth the steeds divine rich with immortal gold their trappings shine.
Bright hebe waits by hebe, ever young, the whirling wheels are to the chariot hung.
On the bright axle turns the bidden wheel of sounding brass the polished axle steel.
Silver the beam, the extended yoke was gold, and golden reins the immortal coursers hold.
Herself, impatient, to the ready car, the coursers joins, and breathes revenge and war.
The sounding hinges ring on either side the gloomy volumes, pierced with light, divide.
Can no resentment touch thy soul?
Can mars rebel, and does no thunder roll?
What lawless rage on yon forbidden plain, what rash destruction!
Venus, and phoebus with the dreadful bow, smile on the slaughter, and enjoy my woe.
Whose unrelenting mind no god can govern, and no justice bind.
Shall we scourge this pride, and drive from fight the impetuous homicide?
To whom assenting, thus the thunderer said go!
And the great minerva be thy aid.
To tame the monster god minerva knows, and oft afflicts his brutal breast with woes.
Thence to relieve the fainting argive throng, smooth as the sailing doves they glide along.
The best and bravest of the grecian band round tydides stand.
To your race a shame, and only men in figure and in name!
The chief thus answered mild immortal maid!
I own thy presence, and confess thy aid.
Then thus minerva brave tydides, hear!
Not mars himself, nor aught immortal, fear.
Full on the god impel thy foaming horse pallas commands, and pallas lends thee force.
Illustration diomed casting his spear at mars.
Now rushing fierce, in equal arms appear the daring greek, the dreadful god of war!
From the rent skin the warrior tugs again the smoking steel.
Of lawless force shall lawless mars complain?
Inhuman discord is thy dire delight, the waste of slaughter, and the rage of fight.
Glorious he sat, in majesty restored, fast by the throne of heaven’s superior lord.
Juno and pallas mount the bless’d abodes, their task perform’d, and mix among the gods.
The episodes of glaucus and diomed, and of hector and andromache.
The gods having left the field, the grecians prevail.
A friend to human race.
Fast by the road, his ever open door obliged the wealthy, and relieved the poor.
Breathless the good man fell, and by his side his faithful servant, old calesius died.
By great euryalus was dresus slain, and next he laid opheltius on the plain.
Melanthius by eurypylus was slain and phylacus from leitus flies in vain.
Unbless’d adrastus next at mercy lies beneath the spartan spear, a living prize.
Old nestor saw, and roused the warrior’s rage thus, heroes!
Behold yon glittering host, your future spoil!
First gain the conquest, then reward the toil.
Then thus aloud ye dauntless dardans, hear!
And you whom distant nations send to war!
Unhappy they, and born of luckless sires, who tempt our fury when minerva fires!
But if from heaven, celestial, thou descend, know with immortals we no more contend.
What, or from whence i am, or who my sire, can tydeus’ son inquire?
Then mighty praetus argos’ sceptre sway’d, whose hard commands bellerophon obey’d.
With direful jealousy the monarch raged, and the brave prince in numerous toils engaged.
First, dire chimaera’s conquest was enjoin’d a mingled monster of no mortal kind!
Hither great hector pass’d, nor pass’d unseen of royal hecuba, his mother queen.
You, with your matrons, go!
A spotless train, and burn rich odours in minerva’s fane.
This heard, she gave command and summon’d came each noble matron and illustrious dame.
The phrygian queen to her rich wardrobe went, where treasured odours breathed a costly scent.
Herself with this the long procession leads the train majestically slow proceeds.
With hands uplifted and imploring eyes, they fill the dome with supplicating cries.
Ever dreadful maid, troy’s strong defence, unconquer’d pallas, aid!
But thou, atoned by penitence and prayer, ourselves, our infants, and our city spare!
Near priam’s court and hector’s palace stands the pompous structure, and the town commands.
Beside him helen with her virgins stands, guides their rich labours, and instructs their hands.
Him thus inactive, with an ardent look the prince beheld, and high resenting spoke.
Thy hate to troy, is this the time to show?
Paris and greece against us both conspire, thy close resentment, and their vengeful ire.
Deserves not this thy care, our troops to hearten, and our toils to share?
Rise, or behold the conquering flames ascend, and all the phrygian glories at an end.
Why did not whirlwinds bear the fatal infant to the fowls of air?
And theme of future song.
The nurse attended with her infant boy, the young astyanax, the hope of troy.
With haste to meet him sprung the joyful fair.
Illustration the meeting of hector and andromache.
Ah, whither dost thou run?
Ah, too forgetful of thy wife and son!
For sure such courage length of life denies, and thou must fall, thy virtue’s sacrifice.
No parent now remains my griefs to share, no father’s aid, no mother’s tender care.
Oppress’d by life consuming woe, she fell a victim to diana’s bow.
Yet come it will, the day decreed by fates!
The day when thou, imperial troy!
Must bend, and see thy warriors fall, thy glories end.
Thy griefs i dread i see thee trembling, weeping, captive led!
To bear the victor’s hard commands, or bring the weight of waters from hyperia’s spring.
May i lie cold before that dreadful day, press’d with a load of monumental clay!
Thy hector, wrapt in everlasting sleep, shall neither hear thee sigh, nor see thee weep.
Whose glory fills the ethereal throne, and all ye deathless powers!
The troubled pleasure soon chastised by fear, she mingled with a smile a tender tear.
My soul’s far better part, why with untimely sorrows heaves thy heart?
No hostile hand can antedate my doom, till fate condemns me to the silent tomb.
Thus having said, the glorious chief resumes his towery helmet, black with shading plumes.
But now, no longer deaf to honour’s call, forth issues paris from the palace wall.
And now, the warriors passing on the way, the graceful paris first excused his stay.
To whom the noble hector thus replied o chief!
In blood, and now in arms, allied!
Illustration bows and bow case.
Argument the single combat of hector and ajax.
Apollo, seeing her descend from olympus, joins her near the scaean gate.
Nine of the princes accepting the challenge, the lot is cast and falls upon ajax.
These heroes, after several attacks, are parted by the night.
Neptune testifies his jealousy at this work, but is pacified by a promise from jupiter.
So that somewhat about three days is employed in this book.
The scene lies wholly in the field.
So spoke the guardian of the trojan state, then rush’d impetuous through the scaean gate.
Him paris follow’d to the dire alarms both breathing slaughter, both resolved in arms.
So welcome these to troy’s desiring train, the bands are cheer’d, the war awakes again.
Thus wings thy progress from the realms above?
Let thy faithful ear receive my words thy friend and brother hear!
The thronging troops obscure the dusky fields, horrid with bristling spears, and gleaming shields.
You then, o princes of the greeks!
And distant ages learn the victor’s fame.
This fierce defiance greece astonish’d heard, blush’d to refuse, and to accept it fear’d.
Stern menelaus first the silence broke, and, inly groaning, thus opprobrious spoke women of greece!
Resolve to earth, from whence ye grew, a heartless, spiritless, inglorious crew!
Wouldst thou run, and tempt a fate which prudence bids thee shun?
Her hoary heroes mourn their sons degenerate, and their race a scorn!
Would to all the immortal powers above, minerva, phoebus, and almighty jove!
What then i was, o were your nestor now!
Not hector’s self should want an equal foe.
All these, alike inspired with noble rage, demand the fight.
Old nestor shook the casque.
By heaven inspired, leap’d forth the lot, of every greek desired.
Ajax, in all the toils of battle bred!
Stern telamon behind his ample shield, as from a brazen tower, o’erlook’d the field.
Approach my arm, and singly know what strength thou hast, and what the grecian foe.
O son of telamon, thy country’s pride!
The wary trojan shrinks, and bending low beneath his buckler, disappoints the blow.
Spouts the black gore, and dims his shining shield.
The sacred ministers of earth and heaven divine talthybius, whom the greeks employ.
Your further force to prove, both dear to men, and both beloved of jove.
To hector be these words address’d.
The generous greek bestow’d a radiant belt that rich with purple glow’d.
But ajax, glorying in his hardy deed, the well arm’d greeks to agamemnon lead.
This fatal day has cost, what greeks are perish’d!
What tides of blood have drench’d scamander’s shore!
What crowds of heroes sunk to rise no more!
Antenor, rising, thus demands their ear ye trojans, dardans, and auxiliars, hear!
The ties of faith, the sworn alliance, broke, our impious battles the just gods provoke.
As this advice ye practise, or reject, so hope success, or dread the dire effect.
The senior spoke and sate.
Then hear me, princes of the trojan name!
Till the new sun restores the cheerful light.
Then shall our herald, to the atrides sent, before their ships proclaim my son’s intent.
The monarch spoke the warriors snatch’d with haste a short repast.
Ye sons of atreus, and ye greeks, give ear!
The words of troy, and troy’s great monarch, hear.
Pleased may ye hear what paris, author of the war, declares.
But to restore the beauteous bride again, this greece demands, and troy requests in vain.
We ask a truce to burn our slaughter’d heroes, and their bones inurn.
Defrauded of your fame, their proffer’d wealth, nor even the spartan dame.
The admiring chiefs, and all the grecian name, with general shouts return’d him loud acclaim.
Then thus the king of kings rejects the peace herald!
Be witness, jove, whose thunder rolls on high!
He said, and rear’d his sceptre to the sky.
He came, and standing in the midst, explain’d the peace rejected, but the truce obtain’d.
Scarce could the friend his slaughter’d friend explore, with dust dishonour’d, and deformed with gore.
See the long walls extending to the main, no god consulted, and no victim slain!
Thus spoke the hoary monarch of the deep.
Thou, whose rage can make the solid earth’s eternal basis shake!
Their bulls they slew back from the tents the savoury vapour flew.
And now the fleet, arrived from lemnos’ strands, with bacchus’ blessings cheered the generous bands.
Of fragrant wines the rich eunaeus sent a thousant measures to the royal tent.
Illustration greek amphora wine vessels.
The second battle, and the distress of the greeks.
Juno endeavours to animate neptune to the assistance of the greeks, but in vain.
The acts of teucer, who is at length wounded by hector, and carried off.
The night puts an end to the battle.
They kindle fires through all the fields, and pass the night under arms.
The scene here lies in the field towards the seashore.
God, by gods adored we own thy might, our father and our lord!
Permit to pity human state if not to help, at least lament their fate.
Oh, flight unworthy great laertes’ son!
His fruitless words are lost unheard in air, ulysses seeks the ships, and shelters there.
Wait the unequal fight these younger champions will oppress thy might.
Hector they face unknowing how to fear, fierce he drove on tydides whirl’d his spear.
The spear with erring haste mistook its way, but plunged in eniopeus’ bosom lay.
Too daring in thy friend’s defence retire advised, and urge the chariot hence.
This day, averse, the sovereign of the skies assists great hector, and our palm denies.
Thy years are awful, and thy words are wise.
Should haughty hector boast i fled inglorious to the guarded coast.
Can thy courage fear the phrygian’s pride?
Hector may vaunt, but who shall heed the boast?
Are fled this arm shall reach thy heart, and stretch thee dead.
Now fears dissuade him, and now hopes invite.
Heard ye the voice of jove?
Success and fame await on troy, on greece eternal shame.
This night, this glorious night, the fleet is ours!
Neptune with wrath rejects the rash design what rage, what madness, furious queen!
I war not with the highest.
All above submit and tremble at the hand of jove.
They shake the brands, and threat with long destroying flames the hostile fleet.
O sire of the distress’d!
Was ever king like me, like me oppress’d?
With power immense, with justice arm’d in vain my glory ravish’d, and my people slain!
His eagle, sacred bird of heaven!
Who first by teucer’s mortal arrows bled?
Heaps fell on heaps, sad trophies of his art, a trojan ghost attending every dart.
He said, and twang’d the string.
It tore, and dipp’d its feathers in no vulgar gore.
Headlong he falls his sudden fall alarms the steeds, that startle at his sounding arms.
The greeks repulsed, retreat behind their wall, or in the trench on heaps confusedly fall.
Shall one raging hand thus level all?
What numbers yet shall fall!
What power divine shall hector’s wrath assuage?
Still swells the slaughter, and still grows the rage!
Say, shall hector glory then?
When juno’s self, and pallas shall appear, all dreadful in the crimson walks of war!
Her father’s arms her mighty limbs invest, his cuirass blazes on her ample breast.
That when her fury burns proud tyrants humbles, and whole hosts o’erturns.
Saturnia lends the lash the coursers fly smooth glides the chariot through the liquid sky.
Heaven’s gates spontaneous open to the powers, heaven’s golden gates, kept by the winged hours.
The sounding hinges ring, the clouds divide.
Prone down the steep of heaven their course they guide.
But jove, incensed, from ida’s top survey’d, and thus enjoin’d the many colour’d maid.
Illustration juno and minerva going to assist the greeks.
Mount the winds, and stop their car against the highest who shall wage the war?
For juno, headstrong and imperious still, she claims some title to transgress our will.
What rage can move celestial minds to tempt the wrath of jove?
The hours unloosed them, panting as they stood, and heap’d their mangers with ambrosial food.
Illustration the hours taking the horses from juno's car.
And now the thunderer meditates his flight from ida’s summits to the olympian height.
He, whose all conscious eyes the world behold, the eternal thunderer sat, enthroned in gold.
Trembling afar the offending powers appear’d, confused and silent, for his frown they fear’d.
He saw their soul, and thus his word imparts pallas and juno!
Say, why heave your hearts?
But know, whoe’er almighty power withstand!
Unmatch’d our force, unconquer’d is our hand who shall the sovereign of the skies control?
Not all the gods that crown the starry pole.
Strength and omnipotence invest thy throne ’tis thine to punish ours to grieve alone.
The assembled chiefs, descending on the ground, attend his order, and their prince surround.
Ye dardan bands, and generous aids, give ear!
And warn their children from a trojan war.
Suffice, to night, these orders to obey a nobler charge shall rouse the dawning day.
From all his host around shouts of applause along the shores resound.
The troops exulting sat in order round, and beaming fires illumined all the ground.
So many flames before proud ilion blaze, and lighten glimmering xanthus with their rays.
A thousand piles the dusky horrors gild, and shoot a shady lustre o’er the field.
Illustration the shield of achilles.
Diomed opposes this, and nestor seconds him, praising his wisdom and resolution.
Ulysses and ajax are made choice of, who are accompanied by old phoenix.
The ambassadors return unsuccessfully to the camp, and the troops betake themselves to sleep.
The scene lies on the sea shore, the station of the grecian ships.
The king amidst the mournful circle rose down his wan cheek a briny torrent flows.
So silent fountains, from a rock’s tall head, in sable streams soft trickling waters shed.
Partake your leader’s care fellows in arms and princes of the war!
Of partial jove too justly we complain, and heavenly oracles believed in vain.
So jove decrees, almighty lord of all!
If i oppose thee, prince!
Thy wrath withhold, the laws of council bid my tongue be bold.
He ceased the greeks loud acclamations raise, and voice to voice resounds tydides’ praise.
These wholesome counsels which thy wisdom moves, applauding greece with common voice approves.
With thracian wines recruit thy honour’d guests, for happy counsels flow from sober feasts.
Who can, unmoved, behold the dreadful light?
What eye beholds them, and can close to night?
This dreadful interval determines all to morrow, troy must flame, or greece must fall.
Then nestor spoke, for wisdom long approved, and slowly rising, thus the council moved.
The counsels of my age attend with thee my cares begin, with thee must end.
Nor, though a meaner give advice, repine, but follow it, and make the wisdom thine.
With justice hast thou shown a prince’s faults, and i with reason own.
The reverend nestor then great agamemnon!
Let chosen delegates this hour be sent to pelides’ tent.
Let phoenix lead, revered for hoary age, great ajax next, and ithacus the sage.
Yet more to sanctify the word you send, let hodius and eurybates attend.
He said and all approved.
The heralds bring the cleansing water from the living spring.
The youth with wine the sacred goblets crown’d, and large libations drench’d the sands around.
Unseen the grecian embassy proceeds to his high tent the great ulysses leads.
Or strong necessity, or urgent fear welcome, though greeks!
Then thus patroclus, crown a larger bowl, mix purer wine, and open every soul.
Achilles at the genial feast presides, the parts transfixes, and with skill divides.
What scenes of slaughter in yon fields appear!
See, full of jove, avenging hector rise!
How my country’s woes distract my mind, lest fate accomplish all his rage design’d!
Our heads inglorious lay in trojan dust, and this the fatal day?
Those wholesome counsels which thy father gave.
With strength, with glory, and success, thy arms may juno and minerva bless!
Check thy anger and be truly brave.
There shalt thou reign, with power and justice crown’d, and rule the tributary realms around.
Alike regretted in the dust he lies, who yields ignobly, or who bravely dies.
Of all my dangers, all my glorious pains, a life of labours, lo!
Your mighty monarch these in peace possess’d some few my soldiers had, himself the rest.
Are fair endowments and a beauteous face beloved by none but those of atreus’ race?
Ye have my answer what remains to do, your king, ulysses, may consult with you.
What needs he the defence this arm can make?
Has he not walls no human force can shake?
And will not these repel the rage of priam’s single son?
One only valued gift your tyrant gave, and that resumed the fair lyrnessian slave.
Life is not to be bought with heaps of gold.
Jove’s arm display’d asserts her from the skies!
Her hearts are strengthen’d, and her glories rise.
One stratagem has fail’d, and others will ye find, achilles is unconquer’d still.
Wilt thou then retire, and leave our hosts in blood, our fleets on fire?
Never, ah, never let me leave thy side!
I tried what youth could do to win the damsel, and prevent my sire.
My sire with curses loads my hated head, and cries, ye furies!
Despair and grief distract my labouring mind!
What a crime my impious heart design’d!
Your sire received me, as his son caress’d, with gifts enrich’d, and with possessions bless’d.
In vain ætolia her deliverer waits, war shakes her walls, and thunders at her gates.
Let these return our voyage, or our stay, rest undetermined till the dawning day.
He ceased then order’d for the sage’s bed a warmer couch with numerous carpets spread.
See what effect our low submissions gain!
Proud as he is, that iron heart retains its stubborn purpose, and his friends disdains.
O soul of battles, and thy people’s guide!
Achilles’ high resolves declare to all returns the chief, or must our navy fall?
Such was his word what further he declared, these sacred heralds and great ajax heard.
Tydides broke the general silence, and undaunted spoke.
The night adventure of diomed and ulysses.
Menelaus, nestor, ulysses, and diomed are employed in raising the rest of the captains.
Diomed undertakes this hazardous enterprise, and makes choice of ulysses for his companion.
The same night continues the scene lies in the two camps.
Now looking backwards to the fleet and coast, anxious he sorrows for the endangered host.
Already waked, atrides he descried, his armour buckling at his vessel’s side.
Joyful they met the spartan thus begun why puts my brother his bright armour on?
But say, what hero shall sustain that task?
For jove, averse, our humble prayer denies, and bows his head to hector’s sacrifice.
Stand off, approach not, but thy purpose tell.
O son of neleus, pride of the greeks, and glory of thy kind!
Then none shall his rule withstand, for great examples justify command.
The camp he traversed through the sleeping crowd, stopp’d at ulysses’ tent, and call’d aloud.
Ulysses, sudden as the voice was sent, awakes, starts up, and issues from his tent.
A bull’s black hide composed the hero’s bed a splendid carpet roll’d beneath his head.
To the brave and strong rest seems inglorious, and the night too long.
Nestor with joy the wakeful band survey’d, and thus accosted through the gloomy shade.
Your nightly cares employ else must our host become the scorn of troy.
Watch thus, and greece shall live.
The hero said then o’er the trench the following chieftains led.
His son, and godlike merion, march’d behind .
The trenches pass’d, the assembled kings around in silent state the consistory crown’d.
What gifts his grateful country would bestow!
What must not greece to her deliverer owe?
But let some other chosen warrior join, to raise my hopes, and second my design.
What chief to join in this great enterprise, is only thine.
The monarch spake, and inly trembled for his brother’s sake.
Then thus my choice declares the impulse of my mind.
Thus having spoke, with generous ardour press’d, in arms terrific their huge limbs they dress’d.
By the shrill clang and whistling wings they knew.
For ever present in my way, who all my motions, all my toils survey!
Then godlike diomed preferr’d his prayer daughter of jove, unconquer’d pallas!
So now be present, o celestial maid!
So still continue to the race thine aid!
The heroes pray’d, and pallas from the skies accords their vow, succeeds their enterprise.
Then he sought the shore, and trod the path his feet must tread no more.
But say, be faithful, and the truth recite!
Where lies encamp’d the trojan chief to night?
In what quarter sleep their other princes?
Ulysses thus, and thus eumedes’ son what dolon knows, his faithful tongue shall own.
Hector, the peers assembling in his tent, a council holds at ilus’ monument.
Then sleep those aids among the trojan train, or scattered o’er the plain?
Or that again our camps thou may’st explore?
No once a traitor, thou betray’st no more.
The welcome sight ulysses first descries, and points to diomed the tempting prize.
The man, the coursers, and the car behold!
Described by dolon, with the arms of gold.
Now twelve despatch’d, the monarch last they found tydides’ falchion fix’d him to the ground.
Illustration diomed and ulysses returning with the spoils of rhesus.
Perhaps those heroes are no more.
Scarce had he spoke, when, lo!
By what chance bestow’d, the spoil of foes, or present of a god?
Not so, the gifts of heaven are of a nobler kind.
Then o’er the trench the bounding coursers flew the joyful greeks with loud acclaim pursue.
Argument the third battle, and the acts of agamemnon.
He then makes a great slaughter of the enemy.
Hector comes against ajax, but that hero alone opposes multitudes, and rallies the greeks.
Patroclus, on his return, meets eurypylus also wounded, and assists him in that distress.
The scene lies in the field near the monument of ilus.
No more they sigh, inglorious to return, but breathe revenge, and for the combat burn.
Illustration the descent of discord.
The king of men his hardy host inspires with loud command, with great example fires!
To second these, in close array combined, the squadrons spread their sable wings behind.
The trojans see the youths untimely die, but helpless tremble for themselves, and fly.
So when a lion ranging o’er the lawns.
And sues his seed for grace?
No, die, and pay the forfeit of your race.
Then, where the thickest fought, the victor flew the king’s example all his greeks pursue.
Perhaps great hector then had found his fate, but jove and destiny prolong’d his date.
Meanwhile on every side around the plain, dispersed, disorder’d, fly the trojan train.
Now storms the victor at the trojan wall surveys the towers, and meditates their fall.
The goddess then o son of priam, hear!
From jove i come, and his high mandate bear.
Tell, who faced him first, and by his prowess fell?
Atrides first discharged the missive spear the trojan stoop’d, the javelin pass’d in air.
Stretch’d in the dust the unhappy warrior lies, and sleep eternal seals his swimming eyes.
Thy country’s friend and virtuous, though in vain!
Unwept, uncover’d, on the plain he lay, while the proud victor bore his arms away.
Assert your honours won proceed, and finish what this arm begun lo!
Angry jove forbids your chief to stay, and envies half the glories of the day.
He said the driver whirls his lengthful thong the horses fly the chariot smokes along.
Lo, jove himself declares the conquest ours!
Now on yon ranks impel your foaming steeds and, sure of glory, dare immortal deeds.
With words like these the fiery chief alarms his fainting host, and every bosom warms.
When jove the trojan’s glory crown’d, beneath his arm what heroes bit the ground?
And stand we deedless, o eternal shame!
Till hector’s arm involve the ships in flame?
Haste, let us join, and combat side by side.
Stern hector’s conquests in the middle plain stood check’d awhile, and greece respired again.
Hypirochus by great ulysses dies, and rich hippodamus becomes his prize.
The storm rolls on, and hector rules the field here stand his utmost force.
Thou shall not long the death deserved withstand, if any god assist tydides’ hand.
The laughing trojan, with a joyful spring.
Leaps from his ambush, and insults the king.
Some god has sped my dart!
Would the same god had fix’d it in his heart!
Trusting to the distant dart, unskill’d in arms to act a manly part!
Nor boast the scratch thy feeble arrow gave, a coward’s weapon never hurts the brave.
What shame, inglorious if i quit the plain?
Let this truth suffice, the brave meets danger, and the coward flies.
Near as he drew, the warrior thus began o great ulysses!
The wound not mortal wise ulysses knew, then furious thus unhappy man!
Whose death our hands shall grace, fate calls thee hence and finish’d is thy race.
Then thus ulysses, gazing on the slain famed son of hippasus!
Then raging with intolerable smart, he writhes his body, and extracts the dart.
To nestor then idomeneus begun glory of greece, old neleus’ valiant son!
Old nestor mounts the seat beside him rode the wounded offspring of the healing god.
Before great ajax see the mingled throng of men and chariots driven in heaps along!
Oh, turn to arms ’tis ajax claims your aid.
His friend machaon singled from the rest, a transient pity touch’d his vengeful breast.
Then fate decreed his doom, and fix’d the date of all his woes to come.
Thy loved injunctions lay whate’er thy will, patroclus shall obey.
Still at my heart, and ever at my side!
Meantime patroclus, by achilles sent, unheard approached, and stood before the tent.
With grief i see the great machaon bleeds.
Can then the sons of greece excite compassion in achilles’ mind?
Seeks he the sorrows of our host to know?
This is not half the story of our woe.
What flattering hopes i entertain!
Chief after chief the raging foe destroys calm he looks on, and every death enjoys.
Thus elis forced, her long arrears restored, and shares were parted to each pylian lord.
Oppress’d, we arm’d and now this conquest gain’d, my sire three hundred chosen sheep obtain’d.
The rest the people shared myself survey’d the just partition, and due victims paid.
Pallas, descending in the shades of night, alarms the pylians and commands the fight.
Achilles with unactive fury glows, and gives to passion what to greece he owes.
A bull to jove he slew in sacrifice, and pour’d libations on the flaming thighs.
Thyself, achilles, and thy reverend sire menoetius, turn’d the fragments on the fire.
Achilles sees us, to the feast invites social we sit, and share the genial rites.
Your ancient fathers generous precepts gave peleus said only this my son!
Thus must ye perish on a barbarous coast?
Resists she yet the raging hector’s hand?
Eurypylus replies no more, my friend greece is no more!
To him the chief what then remains to do?
The event of things the gods alone can view.
He said, and in his arms upheld the chief.
The battle at the grecian wall.
Without the gods, how short a period stands the proudest monument of mortal hands!
This stood while hector and achilles raged.
Incessant cataracts the thunderer pours, and half the skies descend in sluicy showers.
With equal rage encompass’d hector glows exhorts his armies, and the trenches shows.
And you, confederate chiefs from foreign lands!
What entrance here can cumbrous chariots find, the stakes beneath, the grecian walls behind?
So greece shall stoop before our conquering power, and this her fatal hour.
This counsel pleased the godlike hector sprung swift from his seat his clanging armour rung.
The forces part in five distinguish’d bands, and all obey their several chiefs’ commands.
Before the next the graceful paris shines, and bold alcathous, and agenor joins.
Antenor’s sons the fourth battalion guide, and great æneas, born on fountful ide.
Divine sarpedon the last band obey’d, whom glaucus and asteropaeus aid.
Black death attends behind the grecian wall, and great idomeneus shall boast thy fall!
Can those too flatter, and can jove deceive?
Shall two warriors only guard their gates, repel an army, and defraud the fates?
Even yet the dauntless lapithae maintain the dreadful pass, and round them heap the slain.
The warrior sinks, tremendous now no more!
They, pale with terror, mark its spires unroll’d, and jove’s portent with beating hearts behold.
Then hear my words, nor may my words be vain!
To him then hector with disdain return’d are these the faithful counsels of thy tongue?
What coward counsels would thy madness move against the word, the will reveal’d of jove?
Ye vagrants of the sky!
But why should’st thou suspect the war’s success?
The generous impulse every greek obeys threats urge the fearful and the valiant, praise.
Whose deeds are known to fame, and you, whose ardour hopes an equal name!
Their ardour kindles all the grecian powers and now the stones descend in heavier showers.
Resolved alike, divine sarpedon glows with generous rage that drives him on the foes.
Ye valiant leaders of our warlike bands!
With equal steps bold teucer press’d the shore, whose fatal bow the strong pandion bore.
O where, ye lycians, is the strength you boast?
Your former fame and ancient virtue lost!
Lend your valiant hands, haste to the fleet, and toss the blazing brands!
Now rushing in, the furious chief appears, gloomy as night!
The fourth battle continued, in which neptune assists the greeks the acts of idomeneus.
Menelaus wounds helenus, and kills pisander.
The eight and twentieth day still continues.
The scene is between the grecian wall and the sea shore.
Meantime the monarch of the watery main observed the thunderer, nor observed in vain.
Far in the bay his shining palace stands, eternal frame!
Refulgent arms his mighty limbs infold, immortal arms of adamant and gold.
Illustration neptune rising from the sea.
What a prodigy these eyes survey, unseen, unthought, till this amazing day!
Fly we at length from troy’s oft conquer’d bands?
And falls our fleet by such inglorious hands?
A change so shameful, say, what cause has wrought?
The soldiers’ baseness, or the general’s fault?
Will ye perish for your leader’s vice the purchase infamy, and life the price?
’tis not your cause, achilles’ injured fame another’s is the crime, but yours the shame.
Prevent this evil, and your country save small thought retrieves the spirits of the brave.
The fated time, the appointed shore hark!
The gates burst, the brazen barriers roar!
Impetuous hector thunders at the wall the hour, the spot, to conquer, or to fall.
These words the grecians’ fainting hearts inspire, and listening armies catch the godlike fire.
A chosen phalanx, firm, resolved as fate, descending hector and his battle wait.
Meanwhile with rising rage the battle glows, the tumult thickens, and the clamour grows.
By teucer’s arm the warlike imbrius bleeds, the son of mentor, rich in generous steeds.
Him teucer pierced between the throat and ear he groans beneath the telamonian spear.
Prostrate he falls his clanging arms resound, and his broad buckler thunders on the ground.
Repulsed he yields the victor greeks obtain the spoils contested, and bear off the slain.
Between the leaders of the athenian line, deplored amphimachus, sad object!
Lies imbrius remains the fierce ajaces’ prize.
As two grim lions bear across the lawn, snatch’d from devouring hounds, a slaughter’d fawn.
In horrid arms i shine, and urge thy soul to rival acts with mine.
Him, near his tent, meriones attends whom thus he questions ever best of friends!
On some important message art thou bound, or bleeds my friend by some unhappy wound?
Inglorious here, my soul abhors to stay, and glows with prospects of th’ approaching day.
If any greek there be who knows not merion, i appeal to thee.
Or to the left our wonted succour lend?
Hazard and fame all parts alike attend.
In standing fight he mates achilles’ force, excell’d alone in swiftness in the course.
That general horror gave, but touch’d with joy the bosoms of the brave.
Saturn’s great sons in fierce contention vied, and crowds of heroes in their anger died.
For this, of jove’s superior might afraid, neptune in human form conceal’d his aid.
Dreadful in arms, and grown in combats grey, the bold idomeneus controls the day.
The king consented, by his vaunts abused the king consented, but the fates refused.
The great idomeneus bestrides the dead and thus behold thy promise sped!
Our offers now, illustrious prince!
Receive for such an aid what will not argos give?
To conquer troy, with ours thy forces join, and count atrides’ fairest daughter thine.
He spoke, and dragg’d the gory corse away.
Thus asius’ steeds remain the prize of nestor’s youthful son.
Stabb’d at the sight, deiphobus drew nigh, and made, with force, the vengeful weapon fly.
The cretan saw and, stooping, caused to glance from his slope shield the disappointed lance.
Beneath the spacious targe, he lay collected in defensive shade.
Heart piercing anguish, at the haughty boast, touch’d every greek, but nestor’s son the most.
Then idomen, insulting o’er the slain behold, deiphobus!
Nor vaunt in vain see!
Approaching now thy boasted might approve, and try the prowess of the seed of jove.
Alcathous dies, thy brother and thy friend come, and the warrior’s loved remains defend.
This deed to fierce idomeneus we owe haste, and revenge it on th’ insulting foe.
Above the rest, two towering chiefs appear, there great idomeneus, æneas here.
His shield emboss’d the ringing storm sustains, but he impervious and untouch’d remains.
Restless it flies, impatient to be free, and meditates the distant enemy.
Bending he fell, and doubled to the ground, lay panting.
To enchance thy fame high towering in the front, the warrior came.
Nor pierced pisander through atrides’ shield pisander’s spear fell shiver’d on the field.
Lord of earth and skies, above the thought of man, supremely wise!
A godless crew, abandon’d and unjust, still breathing rapine, violence, and lust?
Him on his car the paphlagonian train in slow procession bore from off the plain.
The pensive father, father now no more!
Who held his seat in corinth’s stately town polydus’ son, a seer of old renown.
If heaven have lodged this virtue in my breast, attend, o hector!
Distress’d within yon hostile wall, how many trojans yield, disperse, or fall!
What troops, out number’d, scarce the war maintain!
And what brave heroes at the ships lie slain!
Through all his host, inspiring force, he flies, and bids anew the martial thunder rise.
Slave to womankind, as smooth of face as fraudulent of mind!
Where is deiphobus, where asius gone?
The godlike father, and th’ intrepid son?
The force of helenus, dispensing fate and great othryoneus, so fear’d of late?
These words the hero’s angry mind assuage then fierce they mingle where the thickest rage.
Greece is humbled, not by troy, but heaven.
As thus he spoke, behold, in open view, on sounding wings a dexter eagle flew.
Doom’d to vaunt in vain.
The tumult of the fight, the wall in ruins, and the greeks in flight.
Such was his threat, ah!
Now too soon made good, on many a grecian bosom writ in blood.
Is every heart inflamed with equal rage against your king, nor will one chief engage?
Gerenian nestor then so fate has will’d and all confirming time has fate fulfill’d.
On speedy measures then employ your thought in such distress!
Better from evils, well foreseen, to run, than perish in the danger we may shun.
And wilt thou thus desert the trojan plain?
And have whole streams of blood been spilt in vain?
What yet their fate denies thou givest the foe all greece becomes their prize.
Thy just reproofs like arrows pierce me, for thy words are wise.
Such tydeus was, the foremost once in fame!
Nor lives in greece a stranger to his name.
He added not the listening kings obey, slow moving on atrides leads the way.
With what disdainful eye achilles sees his country’s forces fly blind, impious man!
Whose anger is his guide, who glories in unutterable pride.
So may he perish, so may jove disclaim the wretch relentless, and o’erwhelm with shame!
Each argive bosom beats to meet the fight, and grisly war appears a pleasing sight.
Whose exhalation greets the sense of gods with more than mortal sweets.
Far beaming pendants tremble in her ear, each gem illumined with a triple star.
Last her fair feet celestial sandals grace.
How long shall human strife celestial minds divide?
Let heaven’s dread empress speak her request, and deem her will obey’d.
Then venus to the courts of jove withdrew whilst from olympus pleased saturnia flew.
Imperial dame , great saturn’s heir, and empress of the skies!
And his hush’d waves lie silent on the main.
Illustration sleep escaping from the wrath of jupiter.
For that suffice another day!
But eager love denies the least delay.
Let softer cares the present hour employ, and be these moments sacred all to joy.
On ida’s height, exposed to mortal and immortal sight!
Gazing he spoke, and, kindling at the view, his eager arms around the goddess threw.
If yet ye can deserve the name!
This half recover’d day shall troy obtain?
Shall hector thunder at your ships again?
Thus arm’d, not hector shall our presence stay myself, ye greeks!
Myself will lead the way.
The troops assent their martial arms they change the busy chiefs their banded legions range.
The kings, though wounded, and oppress’d with pain, with helpful hands themselves assist the train.
The strong and cumbrous arms the valiant wield, the weaker warrior takes a lighter shield.
The god, and wondrous man, appear the sea’s stern ruler there, and hector here.
Soon as the greeks the chief’s retreat beheld, with double fury each invades the field.
Here, proud polydamas, here turn thy eyes!
Say, is this chief extended on the plain a worthy vengeance for prothoenor slain?
Destined by our arms to fall.
Behold your promachus deprived of breath, a victim owed to my brave brother’s death.
Not unappeased he enters pluto’s gate, who leaves a brother to revenge his fate.
That on olympus shine, ye all beholding, all recording nine!
On the unsanguined plain laid hyrtius, leader of the mysian train.
Phalces and mermer, nestor’s son o’erthrew, bold merion, morys and hippotion slew.
The fifth battle at the ships and the acts of ajax.
Canst thou, unhappy in thy wiles, withstand our power immense, and brave the almighty hand?
Fair empress of the skies!
What youths he slaughters under ilion’s walls!
Even my loved son, divine sarpedon, falls!
Vanquish’d at last by hector’s lance he lies.
Then, nor till then, shall great achilles rise and lo!
That instant, godlike hector dies.
From that great hour the war’s whole fortune turns, pallas assists, and lofty ilion burns.
The trembling queen swift from the idaean summit shot to heaven.
Fair themis first presents the golden bowl, and anxious asks what cares disturb her soul?
The goddess said, and sullen took her place black horror sadden’d each celestial face.
Thus she proceeds attend, ye powers above!
All he wills, obey and thou, great mars, begin and show the way.
Shall not the thunderer’s dread command restrain, and was imperial juno heard in vain?
Why should heaven’s law with foolish man comply exempted from the race ordain’d to die?
Then juno call’d the winged iris, and the god of day.
Descend, and what we here ordain, report to yon mad tyrant of the main.
If he refuse, then let him timely weigh our elder birthright, and superior sway.
How shall his rashness stand the dire alarms, if heaven’s omnipotence descend in arms?
This if refused, he bids thee timely weigh his elder birthright, and superior sway.
How shall thy rashness stand the dire alarms if heaven’s omnipotence descend in arms?
Striv’st thou with him by whom all power is given?
And art thou equal to the lord of heaven?
What means the haughty sovereign of the skies?
And must i then , o sire of floods!
Bear this fierce answer to the king of gods?
Correct it yet, and change thy rash intent a noble mind disdains not to repent.
To elder brothers guardian fiends are given, to scourge the wretch insulting them and heaven.
The godhead said his will divine the son of jove obey’d.
What grief, what wound, withholds thee from the war?
To him apollo be no more dismay’d see, and be strong!
The thunderer sends thee aid.
Thy phoebus shall his arms employ, phoebus, propitious still to thee and troy.
Thus to bold hector spoke the son of jove, and breathed immortal ardour from above.
A lion shoots across the way!
They fly at once the chasers and the prey.
What portent these eyes invades?
Hector rises from the stygian shades!
Without thy powerful will lo!
Still he lives, pursues, and conquers still!
The warrior spoke the listening greeks obey, thickening their ranks, and form a deep array.
Behind, unnumber’d multitudes attend, to flank the navy, and the shores defend.
Impending phoebus pours around them fear, and troy and hector thunder in the rear.
Mecystes next polydamas o’erthrew and thee, brave clonius, great agenor slew.
By paris, deiochus inglorious dies, pierced through the shoulder as he basely flies.
While these fly trembling, others pant for breath, and o’er the slaughter stalks gigantic death.
A long and ample way.
O’er the dread fosse now steeds, and men, and cars tumultuous pass.
Then with his hand he shook the mighty wall and lo!
Experienced nestor chief obtests the skies, and weeps his country with a father’s eyes.
Thus prayed the sage the eternal gave consent, and peals of thunder shook the firmament.
Presumptuous troy mistook the accepting sign, and catch’d new fury at the voice divine.
He sprinkles healing balms, to anguish kind, and adds discourse, the medicine of the mind.
Though yet thy state require redress depart i must what horrors strike my eyes!
All of trojan, all of lycian race!
Stand to your arms, maintain this arduous space lo!
Where the son of royal clytius lies ah, save his arms, secure his obsequies!
This said, his eager javelin sought the foe but ajax shunn’d the meditated blow.
Extended on the shore our friend, our loved companion!
This death deplored, to hector’s rage we owe revenge, revenge it on the cruel foe.
Where are those darts on which the fates attend?
And where the bow which phoebus taught to bend?
This hector saw, and thus express’d his joy ye troops of lycia, dardanus, and troy!
Be mindful of yourselves, your ancient fame, and spread your glory with the navy’s flame.
How plain thy favours shine, when happy nations bear the marks divine!
How easy then, to see the sinking state of realms accursed, deserted, reprobate!
What hopes remain, what methods to retire, if once your vessels catch the trojan fire?
The listening grecians feel their leader’s flame, and every kindling bosom pants for fame.
Polydamas laid otus on the sand, the fierce commander of the epeian band.
Meantime their fight the spartan king survey’d, and stood by meges’ side a sudden aid.
With thundering sound the warrior falls, extended on the ground.
Lo, where dolops lies and is it thus our royal kinsman dies?
O’ermatch’d he falls to two at once a prey, and lo!
They bear the bloody arms away!
The fiery spartan first, with loud applause.
Warms the bold son of nestor in his cause.
Why stand you distant, nor attempt a deed?
Lift the bold lance, and make some trojan bleed.
Observing hector to the rescue flew bold as he was, antilochus withdrew.
Not with more rage a conflagration rolls, wraps the vast mountains, and involves the poles.
Be men your generous breasts inflame with mutual honour, and with mutual shame!
He spoke, and round him breathed heroic fires minerva seconds what the sage inspires.
The warring nations meet, the battle roars, thick beats the combat on the sounding prores.
That toil of ten long years is finished and the day desired appears!
This happy day with acclamations greet, bright with destruction of yon hostile fleet.
Even ajax paused, stepp’d back, and doubted or to live or die.
Names for ever dear, once sons of mars, and thunderbolts of war!
Yet be mindful of your old renown, your great forefathers’ virtues and your own.
What aids expect you in this utmost strait?
What bulwarks rising between you and fate?
No aids, no bulwarks your retreat attend, no friends to help, no city to defend.
The armour, horses, soldiers, and officers are described.
Divine pelides, with compassion moved.
Oh tell me, to what end thy melting sorrows thus pursue thy friend?
Griev’st thou for me, or for, my martial band?
Or come sad tidings from our native land?
Or may some meaner cause thy pity claim?
Their pain soft arts of pharmacy can ease, thy breast alone no lenitives appease.
May never rage like thine my soul enslave, o great in vain!
No men unborn, and ages yet behind, shall curse that fierce, that unforgiving mind.
Press’d by fresh forces, her o’erlabour’d train shall quit the ships, and greece respire again.
With supplicating breath, thou begg’st his arms, and in his arms thy death.
A boding sigh thy friend return’d and with it, this reply patroclus!
Behold all ilion on their ships descends how the cloud blackens, how the storm impends!
Though jove in thunder should command the war, be just, consult my glory, and forbear.
Would to all the immortal powers above, apollo, pallas, and almighty jove!
Say, muses, throned above the starry frame, how first the navy blazed with trojan flame?
The glowing ocean reddens with the fires.
The hero said the friend with ardour and with joy obey’d.
Achilles speeds from tent to tent, and warms his hardy myrmidons to blood and arms.
Like furious, rush’d the myrmidonian crew, such their dread strength, and such their deathful view.
High in the midst the great achilles stands, directs their order, and the war commands.
A mortal mother mixing with a god.
Such was menestheus, but miscall’d by fame the son of borus, that espoused the dame.
Eudorus next whom polymele the gay, famed in the graceful dance, produced to day.
The son confess’d his father’s heavenly race, and heir’d his mother’s swiftness in the chase.
The fourth by phoenix’ grave command was graced, laerces’ valiant offspring led the last.
Return, ye chiefs, return!’ such were your words now, warriors!
Grieve no more, lo there the trojans bathe your swords in gore!
High throned all height above!
O great pelasgic, dodonaean jove!
Thou gav’st, at thetis’ prayer, glory to me, and to the greeks despair.
Back to his tent the stern achilles flies, and waits the combat with impatient eyes.
Meanwhile the troops beneath patroclus’ care, invade the trojans, and commence the war.
From shore to shore the doubling shouts resound, the hollow ships return a deeper sound.
Then first thy spear, divine patroclus!
Flew, where the war raged, and where the tumult grew.
His troops, that see their country’s glory slain, fly diverse, scatter’d o’er the distant plain.
Next, thoas was thy chance thy breast, unarm’d, received the spartan lance.
But still at hector godlike ajax aim’d, still, pointed at his breast, his javelin flamed.
In vain they labour up the steepy mound their charioteers lie foaming on the ground.
First pronous died beneath his fiery dart, which pierced below the shield his valiant heart.
Him ’twixt the jaws, the javelin sticks, and from the chariot draws.
Where’er he moves, the growing slaughters spread in heaps on heaps a monument of dead.
How many sons of gods, foredoom’d to death, before proud ilion must resign their breath!
Were thine exempt, debate would rise above, and murmuring powers condemn their partial jove.
She said the cloud compeller, overcome, assents to fate, and ratifies the doom.
Tell them, i charged them with my latest breath not unrevenged to bear sarpedon’s death.
What grief, what shame, must glaucus undergo, if these spoil’d arms adorn a grecian foe!
His flying steeds the myrmidons detain, unguided now, their mighty master slain.
God of every healing art!
Renew’d by art divine, the hero stands, and owns the assistance of immortal hands.
Oh too forgetful of the friends of troy!
Stretch’d by patroclus’ arm on yonder plains, o save from hostile rage his loved remains!
Fired, they rush on first hector seeks the foes, and with superior vengeance greatly glows.
What grief thy heart, what fury urged thy hand, o generous greek!
Between the jaw and ear the javelin went the soul, exhaling, issued at the vent.
O valiant leader of the dardan host!
Jove view’d the combat with a stern survey, and eyes that flash’d intolerable day.
At length the greeks obtain the prize contested, and despoil the slain.
The radiant arms are by patroclus borne patroclus’ ships the glorious spoils adorn.
Illustration sleep and death conveying the body of sarpedon to lycia.
Meanwhile patroclus pours along the plains, with foaming coursers, and with loosen’d reins.
Fierce on the trojan and the lycian crew, ah blind to fate!
Is it hector that forbears the fight?
Perhaps apollo shall thy arms succeed, and heaven ordains him by thy lance to bleed.
He bids cebrion drive the rapid car the lash resounds, the coursers rush to war.
The god the grecians’ sinking souls depress’d, and pour’d swift spirits through each trojan breast.
What active feats yon artist shows!
What skilful divers are our phrygian foes!
Mark with what ease they sink into the sand!
Pity that all their practice is by land!
At once bold hector leaping from his car, defends the body, and provokes the war.
Not with less noise, with less tumultuous rage, in dreadful shock the mingled hosts engage.
But when his evening wheels o’erhung the main, glad conquest rested on the grecian train.
Then from amidst the tumult and alarms, they draw the conquer’d corse and radiant arms.
Then rash patroclus with new fury glows, and breathing slaughter, pours amid the foes.
The god in dusky clouds enshrined, approaching dealt a staggering blow behind.
Nor, though disarm’d, patroclus’ fury stood but swift withdrew the long protended wood.
And turn’d him short, and herded in the crowd.
Patroclus thus, so many chiefs o’erthrown, so many lives effused, expires his own.
Cease, and know the powers divine!
Why not as well achilles’ fate be given to hector’s lance?
Who knows the will of heaven?
The seventh battle, for the body of patroclus.
Hector advancing, menelaus retires but soon returns with ajax, and drives him off.
The greeks give way, till ajax rallies them aeneas sustains the trojans.
Aeneas and hector attempt the chariot of achilles, which is borne off by automedon.
The time is the evening of the eight and twentieth day.
The scene lies in the fields before troy.
On the cold earth divine patroclus spread, lies pierced with wounds among the vulgar dead.
This hand, atrides, laid patroclus low warrior!
From thy superior throne, when mortals boast of prowess not their own?
Unmoved, euphorbus thus that action known, come, for my brother’s blood repay thy own.
His weeping father claims thy destined head, and spouse, a widow in her bridal bed.
No longer then defer the glorious strife, let heaven decide our fortune, fame, and life.
For ever now suppress’d the fire which burn’d in that undaunted breast!
Desert the arms, the relics, of my friend?
Or singly, hector and his troops attend?
Slow he recedes, and sighing quits the dead.
To him the king oh ajax, oh my friend!
For naked now, despoiled of arms, he lies and hector glories in the dazzling prize.
He said, and touch’d his heart.
The raging pair pierced the thick battle, and provoke the war.
A manly form, without a manly mind.
How vain, without the merit, is the name!
But shall the lycians stake their lives for you?
What from thy thankless arms can we expect?
Were patroclus ours, we might obtain sarpedon’s arms and honour’d corse again!
Greece with achilles’ friend should be repaid, and thus due honours purchased to his shade.
Already thou prepar’st to fly.
Then turning to the martial hosts, he cries ye trojans, dardans, lycians, and allies!
A moment’s glory and what fates attend!
Beneath thy dart lies slain the great achilles’ dearer part.
I give thee one illustrious day, a blaze of glory ere thou fad’st away.
Hear, all ye hosts, and hear, unnumber’d bands of neighbouring nations, or of distant lands!
Tor this, our wealth, our products, you enjoy, and glean the relics of exhausted troy.
What numbers shall the field o’erspread, what victims perish round the mighty dead!
Is come, my friend and all our wars and glories at an end!
See what a tempest direful hector spreads, and lo!
It bursts, it thunders on our heads!
The warrior raised his voice, and wide around the field re echoed the distressful sound.
Whom with due honours both atrides grace ye guides and guardians of our argive race!
Let generous rage your arms employ, and save patroclus from the dogs of troy.
The long succeeding numbers who can name?
But all were greeks, and eager all for fame.
Nor less resolved, the firm achaian band with brazen shields in horrid circle stand.
Nor dooms his carcase to the birds of air.
Illustration fight for the body of patroclus.
The first attack the grecians scarce sustain, repulsed, they yield the trojans seize the slain.
Then fierce they rally, to revenge led on by the swift rage of ajax telamon.
In life’s first bloom he fell, sent by great ajax to the shades of hell.
Struck at the sight, recede the trojan train the shouting argives strip the heroes slain.
Remain, to save your troy, though heaven its fall ordain?
To our own fears a prey, we seek our ramparts, and desert the day.
He spoke, and foremost to the combat flew the bold example all his hosts pursue.
Perhaps to him this thetis had reveal’d the rest, in pity to her son, conceal’d.
Cursed be the man who dares desert this well disputed day!
Thus they while with one voice the trojans said, grant this day, jove!
Or heap us on the dead!
To share in mortal woe?
Ourself will swiftness to your nerves impart, ourself with rising spirits swell your heart.
Automedon your rapid flight shall bear safe to the navy through the storm of war.
Thy friend is slain, and hector wields achilles’ arms triumphant in the fields.
Alcimedon, with active heat, snatches the reins, and vaults into the seat.
The chief of troy descried, and call’d æneas fighting near his side.
Lo, to my sight, beyond our hope restored, achilles’ car, deserted of its lord!
Can such opponents stand when we assail?
Unite thy force, my friend, and we prevail.
Unmov’d, automedon attends the fight, implores the eternal, and collects his might.
Then turning to his friend, with dauntless mind oh keep the foaming coursers close behind!
Sudden at hector’s side apollo stood, like phaenops, asius’ son, appear’d the god oh prince!
Oh foremost once in fame!
What grecian now shall tremble at thy name?
Then thus begun, to atreus’s seed, the godlike telamon alas!
Who sees not jove’s almighty hand transfers the glory to the trojan band?
But fate decreed his end, in death a hero, as in life a friend!
How ilion triumphs, and the achaians mourn.
High from the ground the warriors heave the dead.
A general clamour rises at the sight loud shout the trojans, and renew the fight.
And breaks its force, and turns the winding tides.
Yet still proceeds the work of death, and still the battle bleeds.
Illustration vulcan from an antique gem.
The grief of achilles, and new armour made him by vulcan.
The news of the death of patroclus is brought to achilles by antilochus.
Thetis, hearing his lamentations, comes with all her sea nymphs to comfort him.
The speeches of the mother and son on this occasion.
The grief of achilles over the body of patroclus.
Thetis goes to the palace of vulcan to obtain new arms for her son.
Thus to his soul he said ah!
What constrains the greeks, late victors, now to quit the plains?
When by a trojan hand the bravest of the myrmidonian band should lose the light!
Fulfilled is that decree fallen is the warrior, and patroclus he!
Thus while he thinks, antilochus appears, and tells the melancholy tale with tears.
Sad tidings, son of peleus!
Thou must hear and wretched i, the unwilling messenger!
For his corse they fight his naked corse his arms are hector’s right.
How just a cause has thetis to complain!
How wretched, were i mortal, were my fate!
How more than wretched in the immortal state!
So short a space the light of heaven to view, so short, alas!
And fill’d with anguish too!
Hear how his sorrows echo through the shore!
Wide opening part the tides, while the long pomp the silver wave divides.
Approaching now, they touch’d the trojan land then, two by two, ascended up the strand.
Thy anguish let me share, reveal the cause, and trust a parent’s care.
He, deeply groaning to this cureless grief, not even the thunderer’s favour brings relief.
Say, goddess, can i boast a pleasure now?
Lost are those arms the gods themselves bestow’d on peleus hector bears the glorious load.
That wretched offspring slain, new woes, new sorrows, shall create again.
’tis not in fate the alternate now to give patroclus dead, achilles hates to live.
When hector falls, thou diest.
Let hector die, and let me fall!
Far lies patroclus from his native plain!
He fell, and falling, wish’d my aid in vain.
Me agamemnon urged to deadly hate ’tis past i quell it i resign to fate.
Yes i will meet the murderer of my friend or meet my end.
Stretch’d pale and dead, no more the grecian hope, or trojan dread!
Yes, i shall give the fair those mournful charms in vain you hold me hence!
But canst thou, naked, issue to the plains?
Thy radiant arms the trojan foe detains.
Insulting hector bears the spoils on high, but vainly glories, for his fate is nigh.
Illustration thetis ordering the nereids to descend into the sea.
Rise, and prevent thy friend’s disgrace, thy own eternal shame!
Who sends thee, goddess, from the ethereal skies?
And iris thus replies i come, pelides!
Thou comest in vain arms i have none, and can i fight unarm’d?
Thy want of arms well we know but though unarm’d, yet clad in terrors, go!
She spoke, and pass’d in air.
Aghast they see the living lightnings play, and turn their eyeballs from the flashing ray.
A lofty bier the breathless warrior bears around, his sad companions melt in tears.
’twas now no season for prolong’d debate they saw achilles, and in him their fate.
Let not my fatal prophecy be true, nor what i tremble but to think, ensue.
When morning dawns, our well appointed powers, array’d in arms, shall line the lofty towers.
And dogs shall tear him ere he sack the town.
Coop whole armies in our walls again?
Was’t not enough, ye valiant warriors, say, nine years imprison’d in those towers ye lay?
I shall stop his flight.
To better counsel then attention lend take due refreshment, and the watch attend.
Or let me gain or give and live he glorious, whosoe’er shall live!
While the long night extends her sable reign, around patroclus mourn’d the grecian train.
So grieves achilles and, impetuous, vents to all his myrmidons his loud laments.
In what vain promise, gods!
Yet a space i stay, then swift pursue thee on the darksome way.
Thus let me lie till then!
Thus, closely press’d, bathe thy cold face, and sob upon thy breast!
Meanwhile to juno, in the realms above, spoke almighty jove.
Say , is their race divine, and thou the mother of that martial line?
Meanwhile the silver footed dame reach’d the vulcanian dome, eternal frame!
High eminent amid the works divine, where heaven’s far beaming brazen mansions shine.
Illustration thetis and eurynome receiving the infant vulcan.
Thetis our powers may claim, an ever dear, an ever honour’d name!
Then with a sponge the sooty workman dress’d his brawny arms embrown’d, and hairy breast.
What occasion calls to these honour’d walls?
’tis thine, fair thetis, the command to lay, and vulcan’s joy and duty to obey.
Illustration vulcan and charis receiving thetis.
To whom the mournful mother thus replies o vulcan!
Say, was ever breast divine so pierced with sorrows, so o’erwhelm’d as mine?
Of all the goddesses, did jove prepare for thetis only such a weight of care?
To her the artist god thy griefs resign, secure, what vulcan can, is ever thine.
The rustic monarch of the field descries, with silent glee, the heaps around him rise.
A ready banquet on the turf is laid, beneath an ample oak’s expanded shade.
The victim ox the sturdy youth prepare the reaper’s due repast, the woman’s care.
The dogs desert the prey, dread the grim terrors, and at distance bay.
The reconciliation of achilles and agamemnon.
Thetis brings to her son the armour made by vulcan.
Agamemnon and achilles are solemnly reconciled the speeches, presents, and ceremonies on that occasion.
The hero obstinately refuses all repast, and gives himself up to lamentations for his friend.
Minerva descends to strengthen him, by the order of jupiter.
He arms for the fight his appearance described.
He addresses himself to his horses, and reproaches them with the death of patroclus.
The scene is on the sea shore.
These glorious arms, that shine with matchless art, confess the hand divine.
Now to the bloody battle let me bend but ah!
The relics of my slaughter’d friend!
Illustration thetis bringing the armour to achilles.
The flies forbid their prey, untouch’d it rests, and sacred from decay.
Achilles to the strand obedient went the shores resounded with the voice he sent.
Long, long shall greece the woes we caused bewail, and sad posterity repeat the tale.
But this, no more the subject of debate, is past, forgotten, and resign’d to fate.
He said his finish’d wrath with loud acclaim the greeks accept, and shout pelides’ name.
What then could i against the will of heaven?
The thunderer, unsuspicious of the fraud, pronounced those solemn words that bind a god.
What can the errors of my rage atone?
Appeased, propitious to our prayer, resume thy arms, and shine again in war.
Whose superior sway all our hosts obey!
Dismiss the people, then, and give command.
Stretch not henceforth, o prince.!
Each due atonement gladly i prepare and heaven regard me as i justly swear!
Here then awhile let greece assembled stay, nor great achilles grudge this short delay.
Till from the fleet our presents be convey’d, and jove attesting, the firm compact made.
Revenge is all my soul!
O first of greeks, the best and bravest of the warrior kind!
Eternal sorrows what avails to shed?
One chief with patience to the grave resign’d, our care devolves on others left behind.
Embodied, to the battle let us bend, and all at once on haughty troy descend.
The solemn words a deep attention draw, and greece around sat thrill’d with sacred awe.
Thou greatest power above, all good, all wise, and all surveying jove!
The black eyed maid inviolate removes, pure and unconscious of my manly loves.
Then thus achilles hear, ye greeks!
Indulge the genial rite achilles waits ye, and expects the fight.
The speedy council at his word adjourn’d to their black vessels all the greeks return’d.
His train before march’d onward, bending with the gifts they bore.
I left thee fresh in life, in beauty gay now find thee cold, inanimated clay!
What woes my wretched race of life attend!
Sorrows on sorrows, never doom’d to end!
For thee they flow, for thee, that ever felt another’s woe!
Her sister captives echoed groan for groan, nor mourn’d patroclus’ fortunes, but their own.
To death’s cold arms resign’d, what banquet but revenge can glad my mind?
What greater sorrow could afflict my breast, what more if hoary peleus were deceased?
What more, should neoptolemus the brave, my only offspring, sink into the grave?
He spoke and sudden, at the word of jove, shot the descending goddess from above.
The charioteer then whirl’d the lash around, and swift ascended at one active bound.
He broke eternal silence, and portentous spoke.
Then ceased for ever, by the furies tied, his fateful voice.
The intrepid chief replied with unabated rage so let it be!
Portents and prodigies are lost on me.
He said, and rush’d to fight.
The battle of the gods, and the acts of achilles.
The terrors of the combat described, when the deities are engaged.
Apollo encourages æneas to meet achilles.
Achilles pursues the trojans with a great slaughter.
The scene is in the field before troy.
These shining on, in long procession come to jove’s eternal adamantine dome.
Who keeps his ancient seat beneath the sacred deeps.
On marble thrones, with lucid columns crown’d, sat the powers around.
Is greece and troy the subject in debate?
Already met, the louring hosts appear, and death stands ardent on the edge of war.
Descend, and as your minds direct, your succour lend to either host.
Or ilion’s sacred wall may fall this day, though fate forbids the fall.
He said, and fired their heavenly breasts with rage.
Now through the trembling shores minerva calls, and now she thunders from the grecian walls.
Troy’s turrets totter on the rocking plain, and the toss’d navies beat the heaving main.
The god of arms his giant bulk display’d, opposed to pallas, war’s triumphant maid.
Against latona march’d the son of may.
The quiver’d dian, sister of the day, saturnia, majesty of heaven, defied.
Where’er he moved, the goddess shone before, and bathed his brazen lance in hostile gore.
What mortal man achilles can sustain?
That claims your care, lo great æneas rushing to the war!
Against pelides he directs his course, phoebus impels, and phoebus gives him force.
Restrain his bold career at least, to attend our favour’d hero, let some power descend.
But if the armipotent, or god of light, obstruct achilles, or commence the fight.
Thus having said, the tyrant of the sea, coerulean neptune, rose, and led the way.
Amid both hosts appear, there great achilles bold æneas, here.
Not so pelides furious to engage, he rush’d impetuous.
So fierce achilles on æneas flies so stands æneas, and his force defies.
Even this, perhaps, will hardly prove thy lot.
But can achilles be so soon forgot?
Defrauded of my conquest once before, what then i lost, the gods this day restore.
Such erichthonius was from him there came the sacred tros, of whom the trojan name.
From great assaracus sprang capys, he begat anchises, and anchises me.
With boundless sway, all human courage gives, or takes away.
To all those insults thou hast offer’d here, receive this answer ’tis my flying spear.
With all his force the javelin flung, fix’d deep, and loudly in the buckler rung.
His fears were vain impenetrable charms secured the temper of the ethereal arms.
Which in modern days no two of earth’s degenerate sons could raise.
But ocean’s god, whose earthquakes rock the ground.
Saw the distress, and moved the powers around lo!
The godhead there with words like these the panting chief address’d what power, o prince!
With force inferior far, urged thee to meet achilles’ arm in war?
Henceforth beware, nor antedate thy doom, defrauding fate of all thy fame to come.
Then thus, amazed what wonders strike my mind!
My spear, that parted on the wings of wind, laid here before me!
And the dardan lord, that fell this instant, vanish’d from my sword!
I thought alone with mortals to contend, but powers celestial sure this foe defend.
Now then let others bleed.
This said, aloud he vents his fury and inflames the crowd o greeks!
Join battle, man to man, and arms to arms!
Think, hector leads you on nor dread the vaunts of peleus’ haughty son.
Deeds must decide our fate.
Then fierce achilles, shouting to the skies, on troy’s whole force with boundless fury flies.
The insulting hero said, and left him sleeping in eternal shade.
Demoleon next, antenor’s offspring, laid breathless in dust, the price of rashness paid.
The man on whom black fates attend the man, that slew achilles, is his friend!
Then with revengeful eyes he scann’d him o’er come, and receive thy fate!
He foams with fury, and exclaims aloud wretch!
But long thou shalt not thy just fate withstand, if any power assist achilles’ hand.
But thy flight this day whole hecatombs of trojan ghosts shall pay.
Deep gash’d the enormous blade, and for the soul an ample passage made.
No prayer, no moving art, e’er bent that fierce, inexorable heart!
This combat ended, the other gods engage each other.
The scene is on the banks and in the stream of scamander.
And now to xanthus’ gliding stream they drove, xanthus, immortal progeny of jove.
And doom’d to go a sadder journey to the shades below.
What wonders strike my view!
Is it in vain our conquering arms subdue?
Try, then, my flying spear!
See, once more lycaon trembles at thy knee.
Jove again submits me to thy hands, again, her victim cruel fate demands!
I sprang from priam, and laothoe fair, two sons she bore for ah!
One spear shall drink each brother’s gore, and i succeed to slaughter’d polydore.
How from that arm of terror shall i fly?
’tis my doom to die!
If ever yet soft pity touch’d thy mind, ah!
Think not me too much of hector’s kind!
What boots it to deplore?
The great, the good patroclus is no more!
He, far thy better, was foredoom’d to die, and thou, dost thou bewail mortality?
So perish troy, and all the trojan line!
Such ruin theirs, and such compassion mine.
What boots ye now scamander’s worshipp’d stream, his earthly honours, and immortal name?
In vain your immolated bulls are slain, your living coursers glut his gulfs in vain!
These boastful words provoked the raging god with fury swells the violated flood.
What means divine may yet the power employ to check achilles, and to rescue troy?
Unhappy is the sire whose son encounters our resistless ire.
What avails to trace our illustrious race?
Such the fate they prove, who strive presumptuous with the sons of jove!
Sprung from a river, didst thou boast thy line?
But great saturnius is the source of mine.
How durst thou vaunt thy watery progeny?
Of peleus, æacus, and jove, am i.
Even achelous might contend in vain, and all the roaring billows of the main.
In valour matchless, and in force divine!
From our injured flood content, thy slaughters could amaze a god.
He said and drove with fury on the foe.
While all before, the billows ranged on high, screen the bands who fly.
Yet dauntless still the adverse flood he braves, and still indignant bounds above the waves.
Might hector’s spear this dauntless bosom rend, and my swift soul o’ertake my slaughter’d friend.
Achilles meets a shameful fate, oh how unworthy of the brave and great!
From jove descending to thy aid, propitious neptune, and the blue eyed maid.
But thou, the counsel heaven suggests, attend!
Thine is the glory doom’d.
Thus spake the gods then swift ascended to the bright abodes.
Not a whole river stops the hero’s course, while pallas fills him with immortal force.
With equal rage, indignant xanthus roars, and lifts his billows, and o’erwhelms his shores.
Illustration achilles contending with the rivers.
The insulting flood requires thy wasteful arm!
Go, mighty in thy rage!
Display thy power, drink the whole flood, the crackling trees devour.
And exert the unwearied furies of the flame!
What power resists thy might?
He ceased wide conflagration blazing round the bubbling waters yield a hissing sound.
On other gods his dreadful arm employ, for mightier gods assert the cause of troy.
Submissive i desist, if thou command but ah!
Withdraw this all destroying hand.
Jove, as his sport, the dreadful scene descries, and views contending gods with careless eyes.
Thy impious hand tydides’ javelin bore, and madly bathed it in celestial gore.
Known how far minerva’s force transcends thy own?
The goddess spoke, and turn’d her eyes away, that, beaming round, diffused celestial day.
What an aid on mars’s side is seen!
The smiles’ and loves’ unconquerable queen!
Mark with what insolence, in open view, she moves let pallas, if she dares, pursue.
And like these heroes be the fate of all who guard the trojan wall!
Thus she, and juno with a smile approved.
How vain that martial pomp, and dreadful show of pointed arrows and the silver bow!
What though tremendous in the woodland chase thy certain arrows pierce the savage race?
Triumph in the skies, and boast my conquest, while i yield the prize.
Abash’d, she names his own imperial spouse and the pale crescent fades upon her brows.
Through blood, through death, achilles still proceeds, o’er slaughter’d heroes, and o’er rolling steeds.
No stop, no check, no aid!
He comes, with unresisted sway he comes, and desolation marks his way!
Thus charged the reverend monarch wide were flung the opening folds the sounding hinges rung.
Enraged achilles follows with his spear wild with revenge, insatiable of war.
When now the generous youth achilles spies.
Thick beats his heart, the troubled motions rise.
Like others fly, and be like others slain?
To shun him by the self same road yon line of slaughter’d trojans lately trod.
But wherefore all this vain debate?
Stand i to doubt, within the reach of fate?
Yet sure he too is mortal he may feel the force of steel.
And hopes this day to sink the trojan name beneath her ruins!
Know, that hope is vain a thousand woes, a thousand toils remain.
Safe from pursuit, and shut from mortal view, dismiss’d with fame, the favoured youth withdrew.
’twas tumult all, and violence of flight and sudden joy confused, and mix’d affright.
Pale troy against achilles shuts her gate and nations breathe, deliver’d from their fate.
The trojans being safe within the walls, hector only stays to oppose achilles.
Hecuba joins her entreaties, but in vain.
Achilles pursues him thrice round the walls of troy.
She deludes hector in the shape of deiphobus he stands the combat, and is slain.
Achilles drags the dead body at his chariot in the sight of priam and hecuba.
Their lamentations, tears, and despair.
She swoons at the spectacle.
Her excess of grief and lamentation.
The thirtieth day still continues.
The scene lies under the walls, and on the battlements of troy.
What boots thee now, that troy forsook the plain?
The chief incensed too partial god of day!
What gasping numbers now had bit the ground!
For one of heavenly strain, to cheat a mortal who repines in vain.
Him, as he blazing shot across the field, the careful eyes of priam first beheld.
For his burning breath taints the red air with fevers, plagues, and death.
So flamed his fiery mail.
My loved, my dearest, bravest son!
Methinks already i behold thee slain, and stretch’d beneath that fury of the plain.
Might’st thou be to all the gods no dearer than to me!
Thee, vultures wild should scatter round the shore.
And bloody dogs grow fiercer from thy gore.
How many valiant sons i late enjoy’d, valiant in vain!
Enter yet the wall and spare thyself, thy father, spare us all!
A wretch, whom in his rage great jove has placed, sad spectacle of pain!
Yet for my sons i thank ye, gods!
’tis well well have they perish’d, for in fight they fell.
The last, the worse, that man can feel!
Man, fated to be cursed!
Revere the words of age attend a parent’s prayer!
To enter in the wall?
That wise advice rejected with disdain, i feel my folly in my people slain.
As hector sees, unusual terrors rise, struck by some god, he fears, recedes, and flies.
He leaves the gates, he leaves the wall behind achilles follows like the winged wind.
The man beloved of heaven, behold, inglorious round yon city driven!
A man, a mortal, pre ordain’d to death!
And will no murmurs fill the courts above?
No gods indignant blame their partial jove?
Go then without delay, exert thy will i give the fates their way.
Swift at the mandate pleased tritonia flies, and stoops impetuous from the cleaving skies.
Thus step by step, where’er the trojan wheel’d, there swift achilles compass’d round the field.
Fierce minerva flies to stern pelides, and triumphing, cries o loved of jove!
This day our labours cease, and conquest blazes with full beams on greece.
Nor force, nor flight, shall more avail him, nor his god of light.
Since you, of all our numerous race alone defend my life, regardless of your own.
Fraudful she said then swiftly march’d before the dardan hero shuns his foe no more.
Troy has view’d her walls thrice circled, and her chief pursued.
No further subterfuge, no further chance ’tis pallas, pallas gives thee to my lance.
The life you boasted to that javelin given, prince!
But know, whatever fate i am to try, by no dishonest wound shall hector die.
I deem’d deiphobus had heard my call, but he secure lies guarded in the wall.
A god deceived me pallas, ’twas thy deed, death and black fate approach!
Fierce, at the word, his weighty sword he drew, and, all collected, on achilles flew.
Above his fourfold cone the gilded horse hair sparkled in the sun.
Nodding at every step and as he moved, his figure seem’d on flame.
Then hector, fainting at the approach of death by thy own soul!
By those who gave thee breath!
Could i myself the bloody banquet join!
No to the dogs that carcase i resign.
Then thus the chief his dying accents drew thy rage, implacable!
When jove and heaven ordain, i follow thee he said, and stripp’d the slain.
Then forcing backward from the gaping wound the reeking javelin, cast it on the ground.
But what is troy, or glory what to me?
Or why reflects my mind on aught but thee, divine patroclus!
Death hath seal’d his eyes unwept, unhonour’d, uninterr’d he lies!
Proud on his car the insulting victor stood, and bore aloft his arms, distilling blood.
He smites the steeds the rapid chariot flies the sudden clouds of circling dust arise.
The wretched monarch of the falling state, distracted, presses to the dardan gate.
My grief perhaps his pity may engage perhaps at least he may respect my age.
Last thy loss sinks my sad soul with sorrow to the grave.
Some comfort that had been, some sad relief, to melt in full satiety of grief!
Late thy parents’ pride and joy, the boast of nations!
Become in one sad day a senseless corse!
Her lord returns no more unbathed he lies, and bleeds along the shore!
What plaintive noise invades my ear?
’tis sure my mother’s voice.
Far be the omen which my thoughts suggest!
I fear, i fear him slain!
Too soon her eyes the killing object found, the godlike hector dragg’d along the ground.
Around a train of weeping sisters stands, to raise her sinking with assistant hands.
Scarce from the verge of death recall’d, again she faints, or but recovers to complain.
Illustration andromache fainting on the wall.
O wretched husband of a wretched wife!
Born with one fate, to one unhappy life!
For sure one star its baneful beam display’d on priam’s roof, and hippoplacia’s shade.
From different parents, different climes we came.
At different periods, yet our fate the same!
Would i had never been!
O thou, the ghost of my dead husband!
Thou to the dismal realms for ever gone!
And i abandon’d, desolate, alone!
An only child, once comfort of my pains, sad product now of hapless love, remains!
No more to smile upon his sire no friend to help him now!
Even from his own paternal roof expell’d, some stranger ploughs his patrimonial field.
Thy father feasts not here ’ the wretch obeys, retiring with a tear.
Thus wretched, thus retiring all in tears, to my sad soul astyanax appears!
Since now no more thy father guards his troy.
Now to devouring flames be these a prey, useless to thee, from this accursed day!
The funeral procession, and the offering their hair to the dead.
He pays libations to the winds, which rise, and raise the flames.
In this book ends the thirtieth day.
The scene is generally on the sea shore.
The body soil’d with dust, and black with gore, lies on broad hellespont’s resounding shore.
Let thy honour’d ghost hear, and rejoice on pluto’s dreary coast behold!
Achilles’ promise is complete the bloody hector stretch’d before thy feet.
Gloomy he said, and before the bier the bleeding hector threw, prone on the dust.
The myrmidons around unbraced their armour, and the steeds unbound.
All to achilles’ sable ship repair, frequent and full, the genial feast to share.
Around the hero’s prostrate body flow’d, in one promiscuous stream, the reeking blood.
From his dead friend the pensive warrior went, with steps unwilling, to the regal tent.
The first and greatest of the gods above!
The form familiar hover’d o’er his head, and sleeps achilles?
Sleeps my achilles, his patroclus dead?
Living, i seem’d his dearest, tenderest care, but now forgot, i wander in the air.
Afford at least that melancholy joy.
He said, and with his longing arms essay’d in vain to grasp the visionary shade!
Yet how like the same!
Deep echoing groan the thickets brown then rustling, crackling, crashing, thunder down.
Patroclus decent on the appointed ground they place, and heap the sylvan pile around.
Whose waves in mazy errors lost delightful roll along my native coast!
Let thy vengeful ghost hear, and exult, on pluto’s dreary coast.
Illustration the funeral pile of patroclus.
She shone amidst them, on her painted bow the rocky pavement glitter’d with the show.
All from the banquet rise, and each invites the various goddess to partake the rites.
But peleus’ son entreats, with sacrifice, the western spirit, and the north, to rise!
The structure crackles in the roaring fires, and all the night the plenteous flame aspires.
All night achilles hails patroclus’ soul, with large libations from the golden bowl.
’twas when, emerging through the shades of night.
Next the white bones his sad companions place, with tears collected, in the golden vase.
Let others for the noble task prepare, who trust the courser and the flying car.
With equal ardour bold tydides swell’d, the steeds of tros beneath his yoke compell’d .
Next him antilochus demands the course with beating heart, and cheers his pylian horse.
Thus the much advising sage concludes then sat, stiff with unwieldy age.
They mount their seats the lots their place dispose .
Shall his mare outgo your swiftness?
Vanquish’d by a female foe?
The coursers at their master’s threat with quicker steps the sounding champaign beat.
And now antilochus with nice survey observes the compass of the hollow way.
Atrides, trembling, casts his eye below, and wonders at the rashness of his foe.
Hold, stay your steeds what madness thus to ride this narrow way!
Take larger field , or both must fall.
Atrides cried in vain he flies more fast, and throws up all the rein.
But thus upbraids his rival as he flies go, furious youth!
Meantime the grecians in a ring beheld the coursers bounding o’er the dusty field.
He saw and rising, to the greeks begun are yonder horse discern’d by me alone?
Or can ye, all, another chief survey, and other steeds than lately led the way?
Idomeneus, incensed, rejoin’d barbarous of words!
To vile reproach what answer can we make?
A goblet or a tripod let us stake, and be the king the judge.
The most unwise will learn their rashness, when they pay the price.
But thetis’ godlike son awful amidst them rose, and thus begun forbear, ye chiefs!
Reproachful to contend much would ye blame, should others thus offend and lo!
The approaching steeds your contest end.
Young nestor follows second in the course.
Merion pursued, at greater distance still, with tardier coursers, and inferior skill.
The man whose matchless art surpass’d the sons of greece!
The ablest, yet the last!
Fortune denies, but justice bids us pay to him the second honours of the day.
Think not i tamely will resign, o peleus’ son!
The mare so justly mine.
Perhaps he sought not heaven by sacrifice, and vows omitted forfeited the prize.
But this my prize i never shall forego this, who but touches, warriors!
He said automedon at his command the corslet brought, and gave it to his hand.
Robb’d of my glory and my just reward, to you, o grecians!
But shall not we, ourselves, the truth maintain?
What needs appealing in a fact so plain?
Thou know’st the errors of unripen’d age, weak are its counsels, headlong is its rage.
So spoke antilochus and at the word the mare contested to the king restored.
Agree ’tis now atrides’ turn to yield to thee.
Rash heat perhaps a moment might control, not break, the settled temper of thy soul.
Not but ’tis still the wiser way to waive contention with superior sway for ah!
How few, who should like thee offend, like thee, have talents to regain the friend!
The golden talents merion next obtain’d the fifth reward, the double bowl, remain’d.
Achilles this to reverend nestor bears.
And thus the purpose of his gift declares accept thou this, o sacred sire!
Now to these tasks succeeds a younger race, that emulate our deeds i yield, alas!
Though once the foremost hero of the field.
The giant spoke and in a stupid gaze the host beheld him, silent with amaze!
Scarce did the chief the vigorous strife prop when tower like ajax and ulysses rose.
Amid the ring each nervous rival stands, embracing rigid with implicit hands.
Thus in thought he pray’d!
And present at his thought descends the maid.
The gods still love them, and they always thrive.
Achilles only boasts a swifter pace for who can match achilles?
He who can, must yet be more than hero, more than man.
The effect succeeds the speech.
Pelides cries, thy artful praise deserves a better prize.
The host admire the son of nestor, worthy of his sire.
Stand forth the bravest of our host!
Fierce at the word uprose great tydeus’ son, and the huge bulk of ajax telamon.
Yet still the victor’s due tydides gains, with him the sword and studded belt remains.
Leonteus next a little space surpass’d and third, the strength of godlike ajax cast.
Swift from the string the sounding arrow flies but flies unbless’d!
No grateful sacrifice, no firstling lambs, unheedful!
Didst thou vow to phoebus, patron of the shaft and bow.
The redemption of the body of hector.
The gods deliberate about the redemption of hector’s body.
Their conversation on the way.
The lamentations of andromache, hecuba, and helen, with the solemnities of the funeral.
The scene is partly in achilles’ camp, and partly in troy.
The chariot flies, and hector trails behind.
Round thy monument was hector dragg’d, then hurried to the tent.
How oft each holy fane has hector tinged with blood of victims slain?
And can ye still his cold remains pursue?
Still grudge his body to the trojans’ view?
Deny to consort, mother, son, and sire, the last sad honours of a funeral fire?
Is then the dire achilles all your care?
Shame is not of his soul nor understood, the greatest evil and the greatest good.
Illustration the judgment of paris.
The patron of the bow.
Then thus the goddess of the painted bow arise, o thetis!
From thy seats below, ’tis jove that calls.
And why calls jove his thetis to the hated skies?
Sad object as i am for heavenly sight!
Ah may my sorrows ever shun the light!
Then through the world of waters they repair to upper air.
The deeps dividing, o’er the coast they rise, and touch with momentary flight the skies.
His word the silver footed queen attends, and from olympus’ snowy tops descends.
Jove himself forbids to tempt the wrath of heaven too far.
To the sacred town, and urge her monarch to redeem his son.
Illustration iris advises priam to obtain the body of hector.
Her piercing cries sad hecuba renews, and then replies ah!
Whither wanders thy distemper’d mind?
And where the prudence now that awed mankind?
Through phrygia once and foreign regions known now all confused, distracted, overthrown!
Singly to pass through hosts of foes!
To face the murderer of thy race!
He knows not how to spare.
And what his mercy, thy slain sons declare so brave!
To claim his rage vain were thy dignity, and vain thy age.
In his dearest blood might i allay my rage, and these barbarities repay!
Could hector merit thus, whose breath expired not meanly, in unactive death?
Had any mortal voice the injunction laid, nor augur, priest, nor seer, had been obey’d.
Add to the slaughter’d son the wretched sire!
What make ye here, officious crowds!
Nor obtrude your anguish on my eyes.
Am i become my people’s common show, set up by jove your spectacle of woe?
Ere that sad day shall come, a willing ghost to pluto’s dreary dome!
He said, and feebly drives his friends away the sorrowing friends his frantic rage obey.
Inglorious sons of an unhappy sire!
Why did not all in hector’s cause expire?
You, the disgrace of priam’s house, remain!
The sons their father’s wretched age revere, forgive his anger, and produce the car.
On lofty ida’s holy hill adored!
To stern achilles now direct my ways, and teach him mercy when a father prays.
If such thy will, despatch from yonder sky thy sacred bird, celestial augury!
Jove heard his prayer, and from the throne on high, despatch’d his bird, celestial augury!
Wide as appears some palace gate display’d.
A beauteous youth, majestic and divine, he seem’d fair offspring of some princely line!
Beware this hard adventure claims thy utmost care!
When each mortal sight is seal’d in sleep, thou wanderest through the night?
Could’st thou provide thyself not young, a weak old man thy guide?
Thy words, that speak benevolence of mind, are true, my son!
For scarce of mortal kind appear thy form, thy feature, and thy mind.
What hopes can troy retain, thy matchless son, her guard and glory, slain?
If then thou art of stern pelides’ train, ah tell me truly, where, oh!
Where are laid my son’s dear relics?
Have dogs dismember’d , or yet unmangled rest, his cold remains?
O favour’d of the skies!
But thou, o generous youth!
Respecting him, my soul abjures the offence and as the crime, i dread the consequence.
Unseen, through all the hostile camp they went, and now approach’d pelides’ lofty tent.
This hermes set wide then swift alighted the celestial guide, and thus reveal’d hear, prince!
Urge him to bestow whatever pity that stern heart can know.
In all my equal, but in misery!
Still one was left their loss to recompense his father’s hope, his country’s last defence.
Him too thy rage has slain!
Beneath thy steel, unhappy in his country’s cause he fell!
Think of thy father, and this face behold!
See him in me, as helpless and as old!
Then with his hand the old man’s cheek he gently turn’d away.
The gods’ severe decree they, only they are blest, and only free.
The happiest taste not happiness sincere but find the cordial draught is dash’d with care.
Ordain’d to fall untimely in a foreign land.
War, and the blood of men, surround thy walls!
What must be, must be.
May’st live to suffer more!
To whom the king o favour’d of the skies!
Here let me grow to earth!
Since hector lies on the bare beach deprived of obsequies.
To my eyes restore his corse, and take the gifts i ask no more.
Cease lest, neglectful of high jove’s command, i show thee, king!
The sire obey’d him, trembling and o’eraw’d.
Two splendid mantles, and a carpet spread, they leave to cover and enwrap the dead.
Forgive me, that i thus fulfil heaven’s unquestion’d will.
Thus consumed with woe, the common cares that nourish life forego.
Have other parents known remember theirs, and mitigate thy own.
He said, and, rising, chose the victim ewe with silver fleece, which his attendants slew.
With bread the glittering canisters they load, which round the board automedon bestow’d.
The chief himself to each his portion placed, and each indulging shared in sweet repast.
For, so long we stay our slaughtering arm, and bid the hosts obey.
This thy request enjoy till then our arms suspend the fall of troy.
The power descending hover’d o’er his head and sleep’st thou, father!
Now dost thou sleep, when hector is restored?
Nor fear the grecian foes, or grecian lord?
Snatch’d in thy bloom from these desiring eyes!
An only son, once comfort of our pains, sad product now of hapless love, remains!
Who now protects her wives with guardian care?
Who saves her infants from the rage of war?
Thence many evils his sad parents bore, his parents many, but his consort more.
Why gav’st thou not to me thy dying hand?
And why received not i thy last command?
As phoebus’ silver bow dismiss’d thee gently to the shades below.
Thus spoke the dame, and melted into tears.
Through troy’s wide streets abandon’d shall i roam!
In troy deserted, as abhorr’d at home!
So spoke the fair, with sorrow streaming eye.
Distressful beauty melts each stander by.
These toils continue nine succeeding days, and high in air a sylvan structure raise.
The unfortunate priam was killed by pyrrhus, the son of achilles.
Nestor lived in peace with his children, in pylos, his native country.
M. aurel anton de seipso, lib.
The thoughts of homer or of shakespere are the universal inheritance of the human race.
Eikos de min aen kai mnaemoruna panton grapherthai.
In schweigh herodot t. iv.
The voice, observes heeren, was always accompanied by some instrument.
Should it not be, since my arrival?
Asks mackenzie, observing that poplars can hardly live so long .
It is quoted as the work of cleobulus, by diogenes laert.
I trust i am justified in employing this as an equivalent for the greek leschai.
Os ei tous, homerous doxei trephein autois, omilon pollon te kai achreoin exousin.
The etymology has been condemned by recent scholars.
Thestorides, thnetoisin anoiston poleon per, ouden aphrastoteron peletai noou anthropoisin.
So plato calls the parties conversing daitumones, or estiatores.
Je ne crois cependant pas avoir trop a me plaindre d’elle en cette occasion.
The assumption of mentor’s form by the guardian deity of the wise ulysses, minerva.
The classical reader may compare plutarch, opp.
Compare mackenzie’s note, p. xxx.
Pericles and aspasia, letter lxxxiv., works, vol ii.
See tatian, quoted in fabric.
See notes and queries, vol.
But all this is nothing to two instances of our own day.
The monument itself is well known.
But all kinds of birds are not carnivorous.
During the whole time of their striving the will of jove was being gradually accomplished.
Compare milton’s paradise lost i.
Brother kings menelaus and agamemnon.
Mure, history of greek literature, vol.
The public assembly in the heroic times is well characterized by grote, vol.
It is an assembly for talk.
See the german critics quoted by arnold.
The prize given to ajax was tecmessa, while ulysses received laodice, the daughter of cycnus.
The same idea is rather cleverly worked out by apuleius, de deo socratis.
Compare milton, paradise lost, bk.
Ii though his tongue dropp’d manna.
Thebe was a city of mysia, north of adramyttium.
That is, defrauds me of the prize allotted me by their votes.
It is therefore on its voyage.
Gives this interpretation, and likewise an allegorical one, which we will spare the reader.
That is, drawing back their necks while they cut their throats.
The custom of adorning goblets with flowers was of later date.
The allegorists have gone mad in finding deep explanations for this amusing fiction.
The story is told by homer himself in book xv.
Sleep’st thou, companion dear, what sleep can close thy eye lids?
See pliny’s panegyric on trajan.
Silius neatly translates it, turpe duci totam somno consumere noctem.
So thick the very crowd swarm’d and were straiten’d.
It was the herald’s duty to make the people sit down.
See some important remarks of heeren, ancient greece, ch.
Full of his god, i.e., apollo, filled with the prophetic spirit.
The god would be more simple and emphatic.
To jupiter, ceres, juno, apollo, and bacchus victims of advanced age might be offered.
An ox of five years old was considered especially acceptable to jupiter.
A black bull, a ram, or a boar pig, were offerings for neptune.
A heifer, or a sheep, for minerva.
To ceres a sow was sacrificed, as an enemy to corn.
The goat to bacchus, because he fed on vines.
Diana was propitiated with a stag and to venus the dove was consecrated.
The infernal and evil deities were to be appeased with black victims.
It was to be perfect in every limb, healthy, and without blemish.
Idomeneus, son of deucalion, was king of crete.
That is, ajax, the son of oileus, a locrian.
He must be distinguished from the other, who was king of salamis.
It should be his chest like neptune.
The torso of neptune, in the elgin marbles, no.
Say first, for heav’n hides nothing from thy view.
Mure, language and literature of greece, vol.
The historian considers this a small force as representing all greece.
See my notes to my prose translations of the odyssey, ii.
Zeleia, another name for lycia.
The inhabitants were greatly devoted to the worship of apollo.
Heeren, ancient greece, section vii.
Lorenzo de medici, in roscoe’s life, appendix.
Thus they, breathing united force with fixed thought, moved on in silence.
Antenor, like æneas, had always been favourable to the restoration of helen.
It, of course, here merely denotes the ready fluency of ulysses.
They perished in combat with lynceus and idas, whilst besieging sparta.
Virgil and others, however, make them share immortality by turns.
Idreus was the arm bearer and charioteer of king priam, slain during this war.
Scaea’s gates, rather scaean gates, i.e.
This was customary in all sacrifices.
This name was derived from one of its early kings, cranaus.
In the original, minerva alalcomeneis, i.e.
The defender, so called from her temple at alalcomene in boeotia.
Anything for a quiet life!
Zelia, a town of troas, at the foot of ida.
Throughout all the historical ages the descendants of asklepius were numerous and widely diffused.
Sthenelus, a son of capaneus, one of the epigoni.
The same portent has already been mentioned.
To this day, modern nations are not wholly free from this superstition.
Sevenfold city, boeotian thebes, which had seven gates.
Stood like teneriffe or atlas unremoved his stature reach’d the sky.
The abantes seem to have been of thracian origin.
Ænus, a fountain almost proverbial for its coldness.
Gl’ empie d’ honor la faccia, e vi riduce di giovinezza il bel purpureo lume.
But to nobler sights michael from adam’s eyes the film removed.
The ichor, or blood of the gods.
A stream of nect’rous humour issuing flow’d, sanguine, such as celestial spirits may bleed.
This was during the wars with the titans.
Amphitryon’s son, hercules, born to jove by alcmena, the wife of amphitryon.
Pherae, a town of pelasgiotis, in thessaly.
Tlepolemus, son of hercules and astyochia.
Here he was chosen king, and accompanied the trojan expedition.
Till morn, waked by the circling hours, with rosy hand unbarr’d the gates of light.
With what majesty and pomp does homer exalt his deities!
He here measures the leap of the horses by the extent of the world.
Arisbe, a colony of the mitylenaeans in troas.
Pedasus, a town near pylos.
The ruthless steel, impatient of delay, forbade the sire to linger out the day.
Can innocents the rage of parties know, and they who ne’er offended find a foe?
These probably were only devices of a hieroglyphical character.
Whether writing was known in the homeric times is utterly uncertain.
Solymaean crew, a people of lycia.
From this melancholy madness of bellerophon, hypochondria received the name of morbus bellerophonteus.
The plain of wandering, was situated between the rivers pyramus and pinarus, in cilicia.
This bad bargain has passed into a common proverb.
Scaean, i e. left hand.
The fifty nuptial beds, the ports of plated gold, and hung with spoils.
The original word is stephanae, about the meaning of which there is some little doubt.
Celadon, a river of elis.
Ajax, the son of oileus, in contradistinction to ajax, son of telamon.
Mars, or mavors, according to his thracian epithet.
And death grinn’d horribly a ghastly smile.
There mavors stands grinning with ghastly feature.
Thus benjamin was honoured with a double portion.
Another essential basis of mechanical unity in the poem is the construction of the rampart.
This takes place in the seventh book.
What cause of fear, c. seest thou not this?
Or do we fear in vain thy boasted thunders, and thy thoughtless reign?
These lines are referred to by theophilus, the roman lawyer, iii.
In the opening of the twentieth book this interdict is withdrawn.
During the twelve intermediate books it is kept steadily in view.
See however, muller, greek literature, ch.
Both these towns were conspicuous for their worship of neptune.
Ungrateful, because the cause in which they were engaged was unjust.
But vain their toil the pow’rs who rule the skies averse beheld the ungrateful sacrifice.
This flight of the greeks, according to buttmann, lexil.
Iphianassa, or iphigenia, is not mentioned by homer, among the daughters of agamemnon.
Such a one was that of which achilles now speaks.
Pthia, the capital of achilles’ thessalian domains.
The phrase hundred gates, c., seems to be merely expressive of a great number.
Compare the following pretty lines of quintus calaber .
Gifts can conquer it is well observed by bishop thirlwall, greece, vol.
Even for real and deep injuries they were commonly willing to accept a pecuniary compensation.
All else of nature’s common gift partake unhappy dido was alone awake.
The king of crete idomeneus.
There’s one did laugh in his sleep, and one cry’d murder they wak’d each other.
Aurora now had left her saffron bed, and beams of early light the heavens o’erspread.
No thought of flight, none of retreat, no unbecoming deed that argued fear.
So they around ulysses prest.
He on his impious foes right onward drove, gloomy as night.
Renown’d for justice and for length of days, arrian.
Some authors have regarded the phrase hippomolgian, i.e.
The epithet abion or abion, in this passage, has occasioned much discussion.
Compare the description of the dwelling of sleep in orlando furioso, bk.
See the note on bk.
Thou also mad’st the night, maker omnipotent, and thou the day.
Milton, paradise lost, book iv.
He was buried on the chersonese, near the city of plagusa.
Zeus or jupiter is popularly to be taken as omnipotent.
The chiefs fight in advance, and enact almost as much as the knights of romance.
It was probably a vast mound of earth with a declivity outwards.
Patroclus thrice mounts it in armour.
A people of thrace, near the hebrus.
Carey’s dante hell, c. xii.
Opuntia, a city of locris.
A few extracts from mr. dyce’s version may here be introduced.
On the independence of the judicial office in the heroic times, see thirlwall’s greece, vol.
That shot their forky tongues incessant forth.
Such were the horrors of dire war.
As if endued with life.
Coleridge has diligently compared this with the description of the shield of hercules by hesiod.
The blue eyed maid, in ev’ry breast new vigour to infuse.
Brings nectar temper’d with ambrosial dews.
Hell is naked before him, and destruction hath no covering.
He stretcheth out the north over the empty place, and hangeth the earth upon nothing.
It was anciently believed that it was dangerous, if not fatal, to behold a deity.
Ere ilium and the trojan tow’rs arose, in humble vales they built their soft abodes.
Drowning, as compared with a death in the field of battle, was considered utterly disgraceful.
So, when with crackling flames a caldron fries, the bubbling waters from the bottom rise.
And thus his own undaunted mind explores.
Hesper shines with keener light.
The city king or guardian.
This was a frequent rite at funerals.
The romans had the same custom, which they called decursio.
Literally, and called orcus, the god of oaths, to witness.
O, long expected by thy friends!
From whence art thou so late return’d for our defence?
After so many funerals of thy own, art thou restored to thy declining town?
But say, what wounds are these?
What new disgrace deforms the manly features of thy face?
In vain i reach my feeble hands to join in sweet embraces ah!
An ancient forest, for the work design’d .
This was a very ancient custom.
Such was the custom anciently, even at the roman funerals.
Hail, o ye holy manes!
Hail again, paternal ashes, now revived in vain.
Presuming of his force, with sparkling eyes, already he devours the promised prize.
If none my matchless valour dares oppose, how long shall dares wait his dastard foes?
Milton has rivalled this passage describing the descent of gabriel, paradise lost, bk.
They are almost too fine and pathetic.
The heroic age, however, must be judged by its own moral laws.
Such was the fate of astyanax, when troy was taken.
Here, from the tow’r by stern ulysses thrown, andromache bewail’d her infant son.
We had accompanied him through the effervescence, undulations, and final subsidence of his stormy passions.
May it haunt their houses pleasantly, and no one wish to lay it.
Old marley was as dead as a door nail.
Scrooge knew he was dead?
How could it be otherwise?
Scrooge and he were partners for i don't know how many years.
The mention of marley's funeral brings me back to the point i started from.
There is no doubt that marley was dead.
Scrooge never painted out old marley's name.
There it stood, years afterwards, above the warehouse door scrooge and marley.
The firm was known as scrooge and marley.
It was all the same to him.
But he was a tight fisted hand at the grind stone, scrooge!
A squeezing, wrenching, grasping, scraping, clutching, covetous, old sinner!
A frosty rime was on his head, and on his eyebrows, and his wiry chin.
External heat and cold had little influence on scrooge.
No warmth could warm, no wintry weather chill him.
Foul weather didn't know where to have him.
They often came down handsomely, and scrooge never did.
But what did scrooge care!
It was the very thing he liked.
You don't mean that, i am sure?
What right have you to be merry?
What reason have you to be merry?
Come, then, returned the nephew gaily.
What right have you to be dismal?
What reason have you to be morose?
Scrooge having no better answer ready on the spur of the moment, said, bah!
Again and followed it up with humbug.
But you don't keep it.
Let me leave it alone, then, said scrooge.
Much good may it do you!
Much good it has ever done you!
The clerk in the tank involuntarily applauded.
You're quite a powerful speaker, sir, he added, turning to his nephew.
I wonder you don't go into parliament.
Dine with us to morrow.
Scrooge said that he would see him yes, indeed he did.
Why did you get married?
Because i fell in love.
Because you fell in love!
Nay, uncle, but you never came to see me before that happened.
Why give it as a reason for not coming now?
I want nothing from you i ask nothing of you why cannot we be friends?
I am sorry, with all my heart, to find you so resolute.
We have never had any quarrel, to which i have been a party.
So a merry christmas, uncle!
And a happy new year!
His nephew left the room without an angry word, notwithstanding.
This lunatic, in letting scrooge's nephew out, had let two other people in.
They had books and papers in their hands, and bowed to him.
Scrooge and marley's, i believe, said one of the gentlemen, referring to his list.
Have i the pleasure of addressing mr. scrooge, or mr. marley?
Mr. marley has been dead these seven years, scrooge replied.
He died seven years ago, this very night.
It certainly was for they had been two kindred spirits.
Plenty of prisons, said the gentleman, laying down the pen again.
Are they still in operation?
Still, returned the gentleman, i wish i could say they were not.
The treadmill and the poor law are in full vigour, then?
I'm very glad to hear it.
What shall i put you down for?
You wish to be anonymous?
I wish to be left alone, said scrooge.
Since you ask me what i wish, gentlemen, that is my answer.
Many can't go there and many would rather die.
Besides excuse me i don't know that.
But you might know it, observed the gentleman.
It's not my business, scrooge returned.
Seeing clearly that it would be useless to pursue their point, the gentlemen withdrew.
At length the hour of shutting up the counting house arrived.
You'll want all day to morrow, i suppose?
It's not convenient, said scrooge, and it's not fair.
The clerk observed that it was only once a year.
A poor excuse for picking a man's pocket every twenty fifth of december!
Said scrooge, buttoning his great coat to the chin.
But i suppose you must have the whole day.
Be here all the earlier next morning.
The clerk promised that he would and scrooge walked out with a growl.
He lived in chambers which had once belonged to his deceased partner.
As scrooge looked fixedly at this phenomenon, it was a knocker again.
And closed it with a bang.
The sound resounded through the house like thunder.
Scrooge was not a man to be frightened by echoes.
Up scrooge went, not caring a button for that.
Darkness is cheap, and scrooge liked it.
He had just enough recollection of the face to desire to do that.
Sitting room, bedroom, lumber room.
All as they should be.
It was a very low fire indeed nothing on such a bitter night.
Said scrooge and walked across the room.
After several turns, he sat down again.
This might have lasted half a minute, or a minute, but it seemed an hour.
The bells ceased as they had begun, together.
The same face the very same.
The chain he drew was clasped about his middle.
No, nor did he believe it even now.
Said scrooge, caustic and cold as ever.
What do you want with me?
Marley's voice, no doubt about it.
Ask me who i was.
Said scrooge, raising his voice.
You're particular, for a shade.
He was going to say to a shade, but substituted this, as more appropriate.
In life i was your partner, jacob marley.
Can you can you sit down?
Asked scrooge, looking doubtfully at him.
You don't believe in me, observed the ghost.
What evidence would you have of my reality beyond that of your senses?
I don't know, said scrooge.
Why do you doubt your senses?
Because, said scrooge, a little thing affects them.
A slight disorder of the stomach makes them cheats.
There's more of gravy than of grave about you, whatever you are!
I do, replied the ghost.
You are not looking at it, said scrooge.
But i see it, said the ghost, notwithstanding.
Scrooge fell upon his knees, and clasped his hands before his face.
Dreadful apparition, why do you trouble me?
Man of the worldly mind!
Replied the ghost, do you believe in me or not?
But why do spirits walk the earth, and why do they come to me?
It is doomed to wander through the world oh, woe is me!
Again the spectre raised a cry, and shook its chain and wrung its shadowy hands.
You are fettered, said scrooge, trembling.
I wear the chain i forged in life, replied the ghost.
Is its pattern strange to you?
Scrooge trembled more and more.
It was full as heavy and as long as this, seven christmas eves ago.
You have laboured on it, since.
It is a ponderous chain!
Old jacob marley, tell me more.
Speak comfort to me, jacob!
I have none to give, the ghost replied.
Nor can i tell you what i would.
A very little more is all permitted to me.
I cannot rest, i cannot stay, i cannot linger anywhere.
My spirit never walked beyond our counting house mark me!
Seven years dead, mused scrooge.
And travelling all the time!
The whole time, said the ghost.
On the wings of the wind, replied the ghost.
You might have got over a great quantity of ground in seven years, said scrooge.
Cried the ghost, wringing its hands again.
The common welfare was my business charity, mercy, forbearance, and benevolence, were, all, my business.
At this time of the rolling year, the spectre said, i suffer most.
Were there no poor homes to which its light would have conducted me!
My time is nearly gone.
But don't be hard upon me!
I have sat invisible beside you many and many a day.
It was not an agreeable idea.
Scrooge shivered, and wiped the perspiration from his brow.
That is no light part of my penance, pursued the ghost.
A chance and hope of my procuring, ebenezer.
You were always a good friend to me, said scrooge.
You will be haunted, resumed the ghost, by three spirits.
Scrooge's countenance fell almost as low as the ghost's had done.
Is that the chance and hope you mentioned, jacob?
He demanded, in a faltering voice.
I i think i'd rather not, said scrooge.
Without their visits, said the ghost, you cannot hope to shun the path i tread.
Expect the first to morrow, when the bell tolls one.
Couldn't i take 'em all at once, and have it over, jacob?
Expect the second on the next night at the same hour.
It beckoned scrooge to approach, which he did.
Scrooge followed to the window desperate in his curiosity.
Many had been personally known to scrooge in their lives.
Whether these creatures faded into mist, or mist enshrouded them, he could not tell.
Scrooge closed the window, and examined the door by which the ghost had entered.
He tried to say humbug!
But stopped at the first syllable.
So he listened for the hour.
It was past two when he went to bed.
An icicle must have got into the works.
He touched the spring of his repeater, to correct this most preposterous clock.
Its rapid little pulse beat twelve and stopped.
Marley's ghost bothered him exceedingly.
At length it broke upon his listening ear.
A quarter past, said scrooge, counting.
A quarter to it, said scrooge.
The hour itself, said scrooge, triumphantly, and nothing else!
The curtains of his bed were drawn aside, i tell you, by a hand.
Its legs and feet, most delicately formed, were, like those upper members, bare.
Are you the spirit, sir, whose coming was foretold to me?
The voice was soft and gentle.
Who, and what are you?
I am the ghost of christmas past.
Inquired scrooge observant of its dwarfish stature.
He then made bold to inquire what business brought him there.
The spirit must have heard him thinking, for it said immediately your reclamation, then.
The grasp, though gentle as a woman's hand, was not to be resisted.
I am a mortal, scrooge remonstrated, and liable to fall.
The city had entirely vanished.
Not a vestige of it was to be seen.
Said scrooge, clasping his hands together, as he looked about him.
I was bred in this place.
I was a boy here!
The spirit gazed upon him mildly.
Your lip is trembling, said the ghost.
And what is that upon your cheek?
Cried scrooge with fervour i could walk it blindfold.
Strange to have forgotten it for so many years!
These are but shadows of the things that have been, said the ghost.
They have no consciousness of us.
Why was he rejoiced beyond all bounds to see them!
Why did his cold eye glisten, and his heart leap up as they went past!
What was merry christmas to scrooge?
What good had it ever done to him?
The school is not quite deserted, said the ghost.
A solitary child, neglected by his friends, is left there still.
Scrooge said he knew it.
It's dear old honest ali baba!
And valentine, said scrooge, and his wild brother, orson there they go!
What business had he to be married to the princess!
Poor robin crusoe, where have you been, robin crusoe?
The man thought he was dreaming, but he wasn't.
It was the parrot, you know.
There goes friday, running for his life to the little creek!
There was a boy singing a christmas carol at my door last night.
I should like to have given him something that's all.
He was not reading now, but walking up and down despairingly.
I have come to bring you home, dear brother!
Said the child, clapping her tiny hands, and bending down to laugh.
To bring you home, home, home!
Said the child, brimful of glee.
Home, for good and all.
Home, for ever and ever.
Father is so much kinder than he used to be, that home's like heaven!
And you're to be a man!
You are quite a woman, little fan!
A terrible voice in the hall cried, bring down master scrooge's box, there!
Always a delicate creature, whom a breath might have withered, said the ghost.
But she had a large heart!
So she had, cried scrooge.
I will not gainsay it, spirit.
She died a woman, said the ghost, and had, as i think, children.
Scrooge seemed uneasy in his mind and answered briefly, yes.
The ghost stopped at a certain warehouse door, and asked scrooge if he knew it.
Bless his heart it's fezziwig alive again!
Dick wilkins, to be sure!
Said scrooge to the ghost.
He was very much attached to me, was dick.
No more work to night.
You wouldn't believe how those two fellows went at it!
Cried old fezziwig, skipping down from the high desk, with wonderful agility.
Clear away, my lads, and let's have lots of room here!
It was done in a minute.
In came mrs. fezziwig, one vast substantial smile.
In came the three miss fezziwigs, beaming and lovable.
In came the six young followers whose hearts they broke.
In came all the young men and women employed in the business.
In came the housemaid, with her cousin, the baker.
In came the cook, with her brother's particular friend, the milkman.
Then old fezziwig stood out to dance with mrs. fezziwig.
If that's not high praise, tell me higher, and i'll use it.
A positive light appeared to issue from fezziwig's calves.
They shone in every part of the dance like moons.
You couldn't have predicted, at any given time, what would have become of them next.
When the clock struck eleven, this domestic ball broke up.
His heart and soul were in the scene, and with his former self.
He corroborated everything, remembered everything, enjoyed everything, and underwent the strangest agitation.
A small matter, said the ghost, to make these silly folks so full of gratitude.
He has spent but a few pounds of your mortal money three or four perhaps.
Is that so much that he deserves this praise?
The happiness he gives, is quite as great as if it cost a fortune.
He felt the spirit's glance, and stopped.
My time grows short, observed the spirit.
For again scrooge saw himself.
He was older now a man in the prime of life.
It matters little, she said, softly.
What idol has displaced you?
This is the even handed dealing of the world!
You fear the world too much, she answered, gently.
Even if i have grown so much wiser, what then?
I am not changed towards you.
Our contract is an old one.
When it was made, you were another man.
I was a boy, he said impatiently.
Your own feeling tells you that you were not what you are, she returned.
How often and how keenly i have thought of this, i will not say.
It is enough that i have thought of it, and can release you.
Have i ever sought release?
In everything that made my love of any worth or value in your sight.
He seemed to yield to the justice of this supposition, in spite of himself.
But he said with a struggle, you think not.
I would gladly think otherwise if i could, she answered, heaven knows!
I do and i release you.
With a full heart, for the love of him you once were.
He was about to speak but with her head turned from him, she resumed.
May you be happy in the life you have chosen!
She left him, and they parted.
Said scrooge, show me no more!
Why do you delight to torture me?
I don't wish to see it.
What would i not have given to be one of them!
Though i never could have been so rude, no, no!
The shouts of wonder and delight with which the development of every package was received!
The immense relief of finding this a false alarm!
The joy, and gratitude, and ecstasy!
They are all indescribable alike.
She added in the same breath, laughing as he laughed.
His partner lies upon the point of death, i hear and there he sat alone.
Quite alone in the world, i do believe.
Said scrooge in a broken voice, remove me from this place.
I told you these were shadows of the things that have been, said the ghost.
That they are what they are, do not blame me!
Scrooge exclaimed, i cannot bear it!
Five minutes, ten minutes, a quarter of an hour went by, yet nothing came.
It was his own room.
There was no doubt about that.
But it had undergone a surprising transformation.
And know me better, man!
Scrooge entered timidly, and hung his head before this spirit.
I am the ghost of christmas present, said the spirit.
It was clothed in one simple green robe, or mantle, bordered with white fur.
You have never seen the like of me before!
Never, scrooge made answer to it.
I don't think i have, said scrooge.
I am afraid i have not.
Have you had many brothers, spirit?
More than eighteen hundred, said the ghost.
A tremendous family to provide for!
The ghost of christmas present rose.
Spirit, said scrooge submissively, conduct me where you will.
To night, if you have aught to teach me, let me profit by it.
Scrooge did as he was told, and held it fast.
The poulterers' shops were still half open, and the fruiterers' were radiant in their glory.
Nearly closed, with perhaps two shutters down, or one but through those gaps such glimpses!
For they said, it was a shame to quarrel upon christmas day.
God love it, so it was!
Is there a peculiar flavour in what you sprinkle from your torch?
Would it apply to any kind of dinner on this day?
To a poor one most.
Why to a poor one most?
Because it needs it most.
You seek to close these places on the seventh day?
And it comes to the same thing.
Forgive me if i am wrong.
Remember that, and charge their doings on themselves, not us.
What has ever got your precious father then?
And your brother, tiny tim!
And martha warn't as late last christmas day by half an hour?
Said a girl, appearing as she spoke.
Cried the two young cratchits.
There's such a goose, martha!
Why, bless your heart alive, my dear, how late you are!
Never mind so long as you are come, said mrs. cratchit.
Sit ye down before the fire, my dear, and have a warm, lord bless ye!
There's father coming, cried the two young cratchits, who were everywhere at once.
Cried bob cratchit, looking round.
Not coming, said mrs. cratchit.
Not coming upon christmas day!
And how did little tim behave?
As good as gold, said bob, and better.
At last the dishes were set on, and grace was said.
There never was such a goose.
Bob said he didn't believe there ever was such a goose cooked.
Its tenderness and flavour, size and cheapness, were the themes of universal admiration.
Suppose it should not be done enough!
Suppose it should break in turning out!
All sorts of horrors were supposed.
A great deal of steam!
The pudding was out of the copper.
A smell like a washing day!
It would have been flat heresy to do so.
Any cratchit would have blushed to hint at such a thing.
Two tumblers, and a custard cup without a handle.
Then bob proposed a merry christmas to us all, my dears.
Which all the family re echoed.
God bless us every one!
Said tiny tim, the last of all.
He sat very close to his father's side upon his little stool.
If these shadows remain unaltered by the future, the child will die.
Say he will be spared.
Will you decide what men shall live, what men shall die?
Scrooge bent before the ghost's rebuke, and trembling cast his eyes upon the ground.
But he raised them speedily, on hearing his own name.
Said bob i'll give you mr. scrooge, the founder of the feast!
The founder of the feast indeed!
I wish i had him here.
My dear, said bob, the children!
You know he is, robert!
Nobody knows it better than you do, poor fellow!
My dear, was bob's mild answer, christmas day.
A merry christmas and a happy new year!
He'll be very merry and very happy, i have no doubt!
The children drank the toast after her.
It was the first of their proceedings which had no heartiness.
Tiny tim drank it last of all, but he didn't care twopence for it.
Scrooge was the ogre of the family.
There was nothing of high mark in this.
Blessings on it, how the ghost exulted!
A light shone from the window of a hut, and swiftly they advanced towards it.
Introduce him to me, and i'll cultivate his acquaintance.
And their assembled friends being not a bit behindhand, roared out lustily.
He said that christmas was a humbug, as i live!
More shame for him, fred!
Bless those women they never do anything by halves.
They are always in earnest.
She was very pretty exceedingly pretty.
Altogether she was what you would have called provoking, you know but satisfactory, too.
However, his offences carry their own punishment, and i have nothing to say against him.
I'm sure he is very rich, fred, hinted scrooge's niece.
At least you always tell me so.
What of that, my dear!
His wealth is of no use to him.
He don't do any good with it.
He don't make himself comfortable with it.
He hasn't the satisfaction of thinking ha, ha, ha!
That he is ever going to benefit us with it.
I have no patience with him, observed scrooge's niece.
Scrooge's niece's sisters, and all the other ladies, expressed the same opinion.
I am sorry for him i couldn't be angry with him if i tried.
Who suffers by his ill whims!
He don't lose much of a dinner.
Indeed, i think he loses a very good dinner, interrupted scrooge's niece.
What do you say, topper?
Do go on, fred, said scrooge's niece, clapping her hands.
He never finishes what he begins to say!
He is such a ridiculous fellow!
It was their turn to laugh now at the notion of his shaking scrooge.
After tea, they had some music.
But they didn't devote the whole evening to music.
There was first a game at blind man's buff.
He always knew where the plump sister was.
He wouldn't catch anybody else.
She often cried out that it wasn't fair and it really was not.
But this the spirit said could not be done.
Here is a new game, said scrooge.
One half hour, spirit, only one!
I know what it is!
It's your uncle scro o o o oge!
A merry christmas and a happy new year to the old man, whatever he is!
He wouldn't take it from me, but may he have it, nevertheless.
Are spirits' lives so short?
My life upon this globe, is very brief, replied the ghost.
The time is drawing near.
The chimes were ringing the three quarters past eleven at that moment.
Is it a foot or a claw?
From the foldings of its robe, it brought two children wretched, abject, frightful, hideous, miserable.
They knelt down at its feet, and clung upon the outside of its garment.
They were a boy and girl.
Yellow, meagre, ragged, scowling, wolfish but prostrate, too, in their humility.
Where angels might have sat enthroned, devils lurked, and glared out menacing.
Scrooge could say no more.
They are man's, said the spirit, looking down upon them.
And they cling to me, appealing from their fathers.
Cried the spirit, stretching out its hand towards the city.
Slander those who tell it ye!
Admit it for your factious purposes, and make it worse.
Have they no refuge or resource?
Said the spirit, turning on him for the last time with his own words.
Scrooge looked about him for the ghost, and saw it not.
Stave iv the last of the spirits the phantom slowly, gravely, silently, approached.
He knew no more, for the spirit neither spoke nor moved.
I am in the presence of the ghost of christmas yet to come?
The spirit answered not, but pointed onward with its hand.
That was the only answer he received.
The spirit paused a moment, as observing his condition, and giving him time to recover.
But scrooge was all the worse for this.
He exclaimed, i fear you more than any spectre i have seen.
Will you not speak to me?
It gave him no reply.
The hand was pointed straight before them.
The night is waning fast, and it is precious time to me, i know.
The phantom moved away as it had come towards him.
The spirit stopped beside one little knot of business men.
Observing that the hand was pointed to them, scrooge advanced to listen to their talk.
I only know he's dead.
Why, what was the matter with him?
I thought he'd never die.
God knows, said the first, with a yawn.
What has he done with his money?
I haven't heard, said the man with the large chin, yawning again.
Left it to his company, perhaps.
He hasn't left it to me.
This pleasantry was received with a general laugh.
Suppose we make up a party and volunteer?
But i must be fed, if i make one.
But i'll offer to go, if anybody else will.
Speakers and listeners strolled away, and mixed with other groups.
Scrooge knew the men, and looked towards the spirit for an explanation.
The phantom glided on into a street.
Its finger pointed to two persons meeting.
Scrooge listened again, thinking that the explanation might lie here.
He knew these men, also, perfectly.
They were men of business very wealthy, and of great importance.
Old scratch has got his own at last, hey?
So i am told, returned the second.
You're not a skater, i suppose?
Something else to think of.
That was their meeting, their conversation, and their parting.
Quiet and dark, beside him stood the phantom, with its outstretched hand.
It made him shudder, and feel very cold.
Let the charwoman alone to be the first!
Cried she who had entered first.
Look here, old joe, here's a chance!
If we haven't all three met here without meaning it!
Stop till i shut the door of the shop.
We're all suitable to our calling, we're well matched.
The parlour was the space behind the screen of rags.
Every person has a right to take care of themselves.
Why then, don't stand staring as if you was afraid, woman who's the wiser?
We're not going to pick holes in each other's coats, i suppose?
Said mrs. dilber and the man together.
Who's the worse for the loss of a few things like these?
Not a dead man, i suppose.
No, indeed, said mrs. dilber, laughing.
It's the truest word that ever was spoke, said mrs. dilber.
It's a judgment on him.
Open that bundle, old joe, and let me know the value of it.
I'm not afraid to be the first, nor afraid for them to see it.
We know pretty well that we were helping ourselves, before we met here, i believe.
Her account was stated on the wall in the same manner.
I always give too much to ladies.
It's a weakness of mine, and that's the way i ruin myself, said old joe.
And now undo my bundle, joe, said the first woman.
What do you call this?
Returned the woman, laughing and leaning forward on her crossed arms.
Yes i do, replied the woman.
You were born to make your fortune, said joe, and you'll certainly do it.
Don't drop that oil upon the blankets, now.
Whose else's do you think?
He isn't likely to take cold without 'em, i dare say.
I hope he didn't die of anything catching?
Said old joe, stopping in his work, and looking up.
Don't you be afraid of that, returned the woman.
It's the best he had, and a fine one too.
They'd have wasted it, if it hadn't been for me.
What do you call wasting of it?
Somebody was fool enough to do it, but i took it off again.
If calico an't good enough for such a purpose, it isn't good enough for anything.
It's quite as becoming to the body.
He can't look uglier than he did in that one.
Scrooge listened to this dialogue in horror.
This is the end of it, you see!
Said scrooge, shuddering from head to foot.
My life tends that way, now.
Merciful heaven, what is this!
Scrooge glanced towards the phantom.
Its steady hand was pointed to the head.
Avarice, hard dealing, griping cares?
They have brought him to a rich end, truly!
He said, this is a fearful place.
In leaving it, i shall not leave its lesson, trust me.
Still the ghost pointed with an unmoved finger to the head.
I understand you, scrooge returned, and i would do it, if i could.
But i have not the power, spirit.
I have not the power.
Again it seemed to look upon him.
At length the long expected knock was heard.
There is hope yet, caroline.
If he relents, she said, amazed, there is!
Nothing is past hope, if such a miracle has happened.
He is past relenting, said her husband.
He was not only very ill, but dying, then.
To whom will our debt be transferred?
We may sleep to night with light hearts, caroline!
Soften it as they would, their hearts were lighter.
The mother and her daughters were engaged in sewing.
But surely they were very quiet!
And he took a child, and set him in the midst of them.
Where had scrooge heard those words?
He had not dreamed them.
The boy must have read them out, as he and the spirit crossed the threshold.
Why did he not go on?
The colour hurts my eyes, she said.
They're better now again, said cratchit's wife.
It must be near his time.
Past it rather, peter answered, shutting up his book.
They were very quiet again.
And so have i, cried peter.
And so have i, exclaimed another.
And there is your father at the door!
Bob was very cheerful with them, and spoke pleasantly to all the family.
They would be done long before sunday, he said.
You went to day, then, robert?
Yes, my dear, returned bob.
I wish you could have gone.
It would have done you good to see how green a place it is.
But you'll see it often.
I promised him that i would walk there on a sunday.
He broke down all at once.
He was reconciled to what had happened, and went down again quite happy.
They drew about the fire, and talked the girls and mother working still.
By the bye, how he ever knew that, i don't know.
Why, that you were a good wife, replied bob.
Very well observed, my boy!
Heartily sorry,' he said, 'for your good wife.
It really seemed as if he had known our tiny tim, and felt with us.
I'm sure he's a good soul!
I shouldn't be at all surprised mark what i say!
If he got peter a better situation.
Only hear that, peter, said mrs. cratchit.
I am very happy, said little bob, i am very happy!
Spirit of tiny tim, thy childish essence was from god!
Spectre, said scrooge, something informs me that our parting moment is at hand.
I know it, but i know not how.
Tell me what man that was whom we saw lying dead?
Let me behold what i shall be, in days to come!
The spirit stopped the hand was pointed elsewhere.
The house is yonder, scrooge exclaimed.
Why do you point away?
The inexorable finger underwent no change.
Scrooge hastened to the window of his office, and looked in.
It was an office still, but not his.
The furniture was not the same, and the figure in the chair was not himself.
The phantom pointed as before.
He paused to look round before entering.
It was a worthy place.
The spirit stood among the graves, and pointed down to one.
He advanced towards it trembling.
Still the ghost pointed downward to the grave by which it stood.
But if the courses be departed from, the ends will change.
Say it is thus with what you show me!
The spirit was immovable as ever.
Am i that man who lay upon the bed?
He cried, upon his knees.
The finger pointed from the grave to him, and back again.
The finger still was there.
He cried, tight clutching at its robe, hear me!
I am not the man i was.
I will not be the man i must have been but for this intercourse.
Why show me this, if i am past all hope!
For the first time the hand appeared to shake.
I will honour christmas in my heart, and try to keep it all the year.
I will live in the past, the present, and the future.
The spirits of all three shall strive within me.
I will not shut out the lessons that they teach.
Oh, tell me i may sponge away the writing on this stone!
In his agony, he caught the spectral hand.
It sought to free itself, but he was strong in his entreaty, and detained it.
The spirit, stronger yet, repulsed him.
It shrunk, collapsed, and dwindled down into a bedpost.
Stave v the end of it yes!
And the bedpost was his own.
The bed was his own, the room was his own.
I will live in the past, the present, and the future!
Scrooge repeated, as he scrambled out of bed.
Heaven, and the christmas time be praised for this!
I say it on my knees, old jacob on my knees!
I don't know what to do!
I am as giddy as a drunken man.
A merry christmas to everybody!
A happy new year to all the world.
He had frisked into the sitting room, and was now standing there perfectly winded.
There's the saucepan that the gruel was in!
Cried scrooge, starting off again, and going round the fireplace.
There's the door, by which the ghost of jacob marley entered!
There's the corner where the ghost of christmas present, sat!
There's the window where i saw the wandering spirits!
It's all right, it's all true, it all happened.
The father of a long, long line of brilliant laughs!
I don't know what day of the month it is!
I don't know how long i've been among the spirits.
I'd rather be a baby.
Clash, clang, hammer ding, dong, bell.
Bell, dong, ding hammer, clang, clash!
Running to the window, he opened it, and put out his head.
Returned the boy, with all his might of wonder.
What's to day, my fine fellow?
The spirits have done it all in one night.
They can do anything they like.
Do you know the poulterer's, in the next street but one, at the corner?
I should hope i did, replied the lad.
Do you know whether they've sold the prize turkey that was hanging up there?
Not the little prize turkey the big one?
What, the one as big as me?
It's a pleasure to talk to him.
It's hanging there now, replied the boy.
No, no, said scrooge, i am in earnest.
Come back with the man, and i'll give you a shilling.
The boy was off like a shot.
I'll send it to bob cratchit's!
Whispered scrooge, rubbing his hands, and splitting with a laugh.
He sha'n't know who sends it.
It's twice the size of tiny tim.
Joe miller never made such a joke as sending it to bob's will be!
As he stood there, waiting his arrival, the knocker caught his eye.
I shall love it, as long as i live!
Cried scrooge, patting it with his hand.
I scarcely ever looked at it before.
What an honest expression it has in its face!
He never could have stood upon his legs, that bird.
He would have snapped 'em short off in a minute, like sticks of sealing wax.
Why, it's impossible to carry that to camden town, said scrooge.
You must have a cab.
He dressed himself all in his best, and at last got out into the streets.
A merry christmas to you!
I hope you succeeded yesterday.
It was very kind of you.
A merry christmas to you, sir!
That is my name, and i fear it may not be pleasant to you.
Allow me to ask your pardon.
And will you have the goodness here scrooge whispered in his ear.
Cried the gentleman, as if his breath were taken away.
My dear mr. scrooge, are you serious?
If you please, said scrooge.
A great many back payments are included in it, i assure you.
Will you do me that favour?
My dear sir, said the other, shaking hands with him.
I don't know what to say to such munifi don't say anything, please, retorted scrooge.
And it was clear he meant to do it.
I am much obliged to you.
I thank you fifty times.
He had never dreamed that any walk that anything could give him so much happiness.
In the afternoon he turned his steps towards his nephew's house.
But he made a dash, and did it is your master at home, my dear?
Said scrooge to the girl.
Where is he, my love?
He's in the dining room, sir, along with mistress.
I'll show you up stairs, if you please.
He knows me, said scrooge, with his hand already on the dining room lock.
I'll go in here, my dear.
He turned it gently, and sidled his face in, round the door.
Dear heart alive, how his niece by marriage started!
I have come to dinner.
Will you let me in, fred?
It is a mercy he didn't shake his arm off.
He was at home in five minutes.
His niece looked just the same.
So did topper when he came.
So did the plump sister when she came.
So did every one when they came.
Wonderful party, wonderful games, wonderful unanimity, won der ful happiness!
But he was early at the office next morning.
Oh, he was early there.
If he could only be there first, and catch bob cratchit coming late!
That was the thing he had set his heart upon.
And he did it yes, he did!
He was full eighteen minutes and a half behind his time.
His hat was off, before he opened the door his comforter too.
Growled scrooge, in his accustomed voice, as near as he could feign it.
What do you mean by coming here at this time of day?
I am very sorry, sir, said bob.
I am behind my time.
Step this way, sir, if you please.
It's only once a year, sir, pleaded bob, appearing from the tank.
It shall not be repeated.
I was making rather merry yesterday, sir.
Bob trembled, and got a little nearer to the ruler.
Scrooge was better than his word.
His own heart laughed and that was quite enough for him.
May that be truly said of us, and all of us!
And so, as tiny tim observed, god bless us, every one!
A scandal in bohemia ii.
The red headed league iii.
A case of identity iv.
The boscombe valley mystery v. the five orange pips vi.
The man with the twisted lip vii.
The adventure of the blue carbuncle viii.
The adventure of the speckled band ix.
The adventure of the engineer’s thumb x.
The adventure of the noble bachelor xi.
The adventure of the beryl coronet xii.
The adventure of the copper beeches i.
A scandal in bohemia i.
To sherlock holmes she is always the woman.
I have seldom heard him mention her under any other name.
In his eyes she eclipses and predominates the whole of her sex.
It was not that he felt any emotion akin to love for irene adler.
He never spoke of the softer passions, save with a gibe and a sneer.
I had seen little of holmes lately.
My marriage had drifted us away from each other.
He was at work again.
His manner was not effusive.
It seldom was but he was glad, i think, to see me.
Then he stood before the fire and looked me over in his singular introspective fashion.
Wedlock suits you, he remarked.
Indeed, i should have thought a little more.
Just a trifle more, i fancy, watson.
And in practice again, i observe.
You did not tell me that you intended to go into harness.
Then, how do you know?
I see it, i deduce it.
My dear holmes, said i, this is too much.
He chuckled to himself and rubbed his long, nervous hands together.
And yet i believe that my eyes are as good as yours.
Quite so, he answered, lighting a cigarette, and throwing himself down into an armchair.
You see, but you do not observe.
Well, some hundreds of times.
Then how many are there?
And yet you have seen.
That is just my point.
Now, i know that there are seventeen steps, because i have both seen and observed.
It came by the last post, said he.
The note was undated, and without either signature or address.
This account of you we have from all quarters received.
This is indeed a mystery, i remarked.
What do you imagine that it means?
I have no data yet.
It is a capital mistake to theorise before one has data.
Insensibly one begins to twist facts to suit theories, instead of theories to suit facts.
What do you deduce from it?
I carefully examined the writing, and the paper upon which it was written.
Such paper could not be bought under half a crown a packet.
It is peculiarly strong and stiff.
Peculiar that is the very word, said holmes.
It is not an english paper at all.
Hold it up to the light.
What do you make of that?
The name of the maker, no doubt or his monogram, rather.
Eglow, eglonitz here we are, egria.
It is in a german speaking country in bohemia, not far from carlsbad.
His eyes sparkled, and he sent up a great blue triumphant cloud from his cigarette.
The paper was made in bohemia, i said.
And the man who wrote the note is a german.
It is the german who is so uncourteous to his verbs.
And here he comes, if i am not mistaken, to resolve all our doubts.
A pair, by the sound, said he.
Yes, he continued, glancing out of the window.
A nice little brougham and a pair of beauties.
A hundred and fifty guineas apiece.
There’s money in this case, watson, if there is nothing else.
I think that i had better go, holmes.
I am lost without my boswell.
And this promises to be interesting.
It would be a pity to miss it.
But your client never mind him.
I may want your help, and so may he.
Sit down in that armchair, doctor, and give us your best attention.
Then there was a loud and authoritative tap.
He asked with a deep harsh voice and a strongly marked german accent.
I told you that i would call.
He looked from one to the other of us, as if uncertain which to address.
Pray take a seat, said holmes.
Whom have i the honour to address?
You may address me as the count von kramm, a bohemian nobleman.
If not, i should much prefer to communicate with you alone.
It is both, or none, said he.
You may say before this gentleman anything which you may say to me.
The count shrugged his broad shoulders.
You will excuse this mask, continued our strange visitor.
I was aware of it, said holmes dryly.
To speak plainly, the matter implicates the great house of ormstein, hereditary kings of bohemia.
Holmes slowly reopened his eyes and looked impatiently at his gigantic client.
You are right, he cried i am the king.
Why should i attempt to conceal it?
I have come incognito from prague for the purpose of consulting you.
Then, pray consult, said holmes, shutting his eyes once more.
The name is no doubt familiar to you.
Kindly look her up in my index, doctor, murmured holmes without opening his eyes.
Prima donna imperial opera of warsaw yes!
Retired from operatic stage ha!
Living in london quite so!
But how was there a secret marriage?
No legal papers or certificates?
Then i fail to follow your majesty.
We were both in the photograph.
Your majesty has indeed committed an indiscretion.
You have compromised yourself seriously.
I was only crown prince then.
I am but thirty now.
We have tried and failed.
Five attempts have been made.
Twice burglars in my pay ransacked her house.
Once we diverted her luggage when she travelled.
Twice she has been waylaid.
There has been no result.
It is quite a pretty little problem, said he.
But a very serious one to me, returned the king reproachfully.
And what does she propose to do with the photograph?
I am about to be married.
To clotilde lothman von saxe meningen, second daughter of the king of scandinavia.
You may know the strict principles of her family.
She is herself the very soul of delicacy.
Threatens to send them the photograph.
And she will do it.
I know that she will do it.
You do not know her, but she has a soul of steel.
You are sure that she has not sent it yet?
That will be next monday.
Oh, then we have three days yet, said holmes with a yawn.
Your majesty will, of course, stay in london for the present?
You will find me at the langham under the name of the count von kramm.
Then i shall drop you a line to let you know how we progress.
I shall be all anxiety.
You have carte blanche .
There are three hundred pounds in gold and seven hundred in notes, he said.
Is briony lodge, serpentine avenue, st. john’s wood.
Holmes took a note of it.
One other question, said he.
Was the photograph a cabinet?
At three o’clock precisely i was at baker street, but holmes had not yet returned.
Quite so but the sequel was rather unusual.
I will tell you, however.
There is a wonderful sympathy and freemasonry among horsey men.
Be one of them, and you will know all that there is to know.
I soon found briony lodge.
Chubb lock to the door.
And what of irene adler?
Oh, she has turned all the men’s heads down in that part.
She is the daintiest thing under a bonnet on this planet.
So say the serpentine mews, to a man.
Seldom goes out at other times, except when she sings.
Has only one male visitor, but a good deal of him.
He is a mr. godfrey norton, of the inner temple.
See the advantages of a cabman as a confidant.
This godfrey norton was evidently an important factor in the matter.
What was the relation between them, and what the object of his repeated visits?
Was she his client, his friend, or his mistress?
If the former, she had probably transferred the photograph to his keeping.
If the latter, it was less likely.
It was a delicate point, and it widened the field of my inquiry.
I am following you closely, i answered.
Of her i could see nothing.
Presently he emerged, looking even more flurried than before.
It hadn’t pulled up before she shot out of the hall door and into it.
I don’t think i ever drove faster, but the others were there before us.
I paid the man and hurried into the church.
Come!’ what then?’ i asked.
This is a very unexpected turn of affairs, said i and what then?
Well, i found my plans very seriously menaced.
They drove away in different directions, and i went off to make my own arrangements.
Some cold beef and a glass of beer, he answered, ringing the bell.
By the way, doctor, i shall want your co operation.
You don’t mind breaking the law?
Nor running a chance of arrest?
Not in a good cause.
Oh, the cause is excellent!
Then i am your man.
I was sure that i might rely on you.
But what is it you wish?
When mrs. turner has brought in the tray i will make it clear to you.
It is nearly five now.
Miss irene, or madame, rather, returns from her drive at seven.
We must be at briony lodge to meet her.
You must leave that to me.
I have already arranged what is to occur.
There is only one point on which i must insist.
You must not interfere, come what may.
I am to be neutral?
There will probably be some small unpleasantness.
Do not join in it.
It will end in my being conveyed into the house.
Four or five minutes afterwards the sitting room window will open.
You are to station yourself close to that open window.
You are to watch me, for i will be visible to you.
Your task is confined to that.
I hope that i have made myself clear?
Then you may entirely rely on me.
It was not merely that holmes changed his costume.
On the contrary, for a small street in a quiet neighbourhood, it was remarkably animated.
The photograph becomes a double edged weapon now.
Now the question is, where are we to find the photograph?
It is most unlikely that she carries it about with her.
Too large for easy concealment about a woman’s dress.
She knows that the king is capable of having her waylaid and searched.
Two attempts of the sort have already been made.
We may take it, then, that she does not carry it about with her.
Her banker or her lawyer.
There is that double possibility.
But i am inclined to think neither.
Women are naturally secretive, and they like to do their own secreting.
Why should she hand it over to anyone else?
Besides, remember that she had resolved to use it within a few days.
It must be where she can lay her hands upon it.
It must be in her own house.
But it has twice been burgled.
They did not know how to look.
But how will you look?
I will get her to show me.
She will not be able to.
But i hear the rumble of wheels.
It was a smart little landau which rattled up to the door of briony lodge.
Is the poor gentleman much hurt?
He is dead, cried several voices.
No, no, there’s life in him!
But he’ll be gone before you can get him to hospital.
He’s a brave fellow, said a woman.
They would have had the lady’s purse and watch if it hadn’t been for him.
They were a gang, and a rough one, too.
He can’t lie in the street.
May we bring him in, marm?
Bring him into the sitting room.
There is a comfortable sofa.
I hardened my heart, and took the smoke rocket from under my ulster.
After all, i thought, we are not injuring her.
We are but preventing her from injuring another.
A maid rushed across and threw open the window.
Thick clouds of smoke curled through the room and out at the open window.
You did it very nicely, doctor, he remarked.
Nothing could have been better.
I know where it is.
And how did you find out?
She showed me, as i told you she would.
I am still in the dark.
I do not wish to make a mystery, said he, laughing.
The matter was perfectly simple.
You, of course, saw that everyone in the street was an accomplice.
They were all engaged for the evening.
It is an old trick.
That also i could fathom.
Then they carried me in.
She was bound to have me in.
What else could she do?
And into her sitting room, which was the very room which i suspected.
It lay between that and her bedroom, and i was determined to see which.
How did that help you?
A married woman grabs at her baby an unmarried one reaches for her jewel box.
She would rush to secure it.
The smoke and shouting were enough to shake nerves of steel.
I rose, and, making my excuses, escaped from the house.
A little over precipitance may ruin all.
Our quest is practically finished.
It might be a satisfaction to his majesty to regain it with his own hands.
And when will you call?
At eight in the morning.
She will not be up, so that we shall have a clear field.
I must wire to the king without delay.
We had reached baker street and had stopped at the door.
I’ve heard that voice before, said holmes, staring down the dimly lit street.
Now, i wonder who the deuce that could have been.
You have really got it!
He cried, grasping sherlock holmes by either shoulder and looking eagerly into his face.
I am all impatience to be gone.
We must have a cab.
No, my brougham is waiting.
Then that will simplify matters.
We descended and started off once more for briony lodge.
Irene adler is married, remarked holmes.
To an english lawyer named norton.
But she could not love him.
I am in hopes that she does.
Because it would spare your majesty all fear of future annoyance.
If the lady loves her husband, she does not love your majesty.
I wish she had been of my own station!
What a queen she would have made!
The door of briony lodge was open, and an elderly woman stood upon the steps.
Mr. sherlock holmes, i believe?
My mistress told me that you were likely to call.
Sherlock holmes staggered back, white with chagrin and surprise.
Do you mean that she has left england?
My friend tore it open, and we all three read it together.
You took me in completely.
Until after the alarm of fire, i had not a suspicion.
But then, when i found how i had betrayed myself, i began to think.
I had been warned against you months ago.
And your address had been given me.
Yet, with all this, you made me reveal what you wanted to know.
But, you know, i have been trained as an actress myself.
Male costume is nothing new to me.
I often take advantage of the freedom which it gives.
As to the photograph, your client may rest in peace.
I love and am loved by a better man than he.
What a woman oh, what a woman!
Cried the king of bohemia, when we had all three read this epistle.
Did i not tell you how quick and resolute she was?
Would she not have made an admirable queen?
On the contrary, my dear sir, cried the king nothing could be more successful.
I know that her word is inviolate.
The photograph is now as safe as if it were in the fire.
I am glad to hear your majesty say so.
I am immensely indebted to you.
Pray tell me in what way i can reward you.
Your majesty has something which i should value even more highly, said holmes.
You have but to name it.
The king stared at him in amazement.
Certainly, if you wish it.
Then there is no more to be done in the matter.
I have the honour to wish you a very good morning.
I was afraid that you were engaged.
Then i can wait in the next room.
Your cases have indeed been of the greatest interest to me, i observed.
A proposition which i took the liberty of doubting.
Perhaps, mr. wilson, you would have the great kindness to recommence your narrative.
I did not gain very much, however, by my inspection.
How, in the name of good fortune, did you know all that, mr. holmes?
How did you know, for example, that i did manual labour.
It’s as true as gospel, for i began as a ship’s carpenter.
Your hands, my dear sir.
Your right hand is quite a size larger than your left.
You have worked with it, and the muscles are more developed.
Well, the snuff, then, and the freemasonry?
Ah, of course, i forgot that.
Mr. jabez wilson laughed heavily.
I begin to think, watson, said holmes, that i make a mistake in explaining.
Can you not find the advertisement, mr. wilson?
This is what began it all.
You just read it for yourself, sir.
What on earth does this mean?
I ejaculated after i had twice read over the extraordinary announcement.
Holmes chuckled and wriggled in his chair, as was his habit when in high spirits.
It is a little off the beaten track, isn’t it?
You will first make a note, doctor, of the paper and the date.
What is the name of this obliging youth?
His name is vincent spaulding, and he’s not such a youth, either.
It’s hard to say his age.
But, after all, if he is satisfied, why should i put ideas in his head?
You seem most fortunate in having an employé who comes under the full market price.
It is not a common experience among employers in this age.
I don’t know that your assistant is not as remarkable as your advertisement.
Oh, he has his faults, too, said mr. wilson.
Never was such a fellow for photography.
That is his main fault, but on the whole he’s a good worker.
There’s no vice in him.
He is still with you, i presume?
The first thing that put us out was that advertisement.
Why,’ says he, here’s another vacancy on the league of the red headed men.
You see it is really confined to londoners, and to grown men.
I never hope to see such a sight as that again, mr. holmes.
Pray continue your very interesting statement.
Getting a vacancy did not seem to be such a very easy matter, after all.
Then suddenly he plunged forward, wrung my hand, and congratulated me warmly on my success.
It would be injustice to hesitate,’ said he.
There is water in your eyes,’ said he as he released me.
I perceive that all is as it should be.
Are you a married man, mr. wilson?
Have you a family?’ i answered that i had not.
Dear me!’ he said gravely, that is very serious indeed!
I am sorry to hear you say that.
That would suit me very well,’ said i.
If you leave, you forfeit your whole position forever.
The will is very clear upon that point.
No excuse will avail,’ said mr. duncan ross neither sickness nor business nor anything else.
There is the first volume of it in that press.
Will you be ready to morrow?’ certainly,’ i answered.
Well, to my surprise and delight, everything was as right as possible.
It was the same next week, and the same the week after.
Every morning i was there at ten, and every afternoon i left at two.
And then suddenly the whole business came to an end.
And no later than this morning.
Here it is, and you can read for yourself.
It read in this fashion the red headed league is dissolved.
If you can do nothing better than laugh at me, i can go elsewhere.
I really wouldn’t miss your case for the world.
It is most refreshingly unusual.
Pray what steps did you take when you found the card upon the door?
I did not know what to do.
He said that he had never heard of any such body.
Then i asked him who mr. duncan ross was.
He answered that the name was new to him.
Well,’ said i, the gentleman at no.
He moved out yesterday.’ where could i find him?’ oh, at his new offices.
He did tell me the address.
And what did you do then?
I went home to saxe coburg square, and i took the advice of my assistant.
But he could not help me in any way.
He could only say that if i waited i should hear by post.
But that was not quite good enough, mr. holmes.
And you did very wisely, said holmes.
Why, i have lost four pound a week.
You have lost nothing by them.
We shall endeavour to clear up these points for you.
And, first, one or two questions, mr. wilson.
In answer to an advertisement.
Was he the only applicant?
No, i had a dozen.
Why did you pick him?
Because he was handy and would come cheap.
At half wages, in fact.
What is he like, this vincent spaulding?
Has a white splash of acid upon his forehead.
Holmes sat up in his chair in considerable excitement.
I thought as much, said he.
Have you ever observed that his ears are pierced for earrings?
Said holmes, sinking back in deep thought.
He is still with you?
Oh, yes, sir i have only just left him.
And has your business been attended to in your absence?
Nothing to complain of, sir.
There’s never very much to do of a morning.
That will do, mr. wilson.
I make nothing of it, i answered frankly.
It is a most mysterious business.
But i must be prompt over this matter.
What are you going to do, then?
Sarasate plays at the st. james’s hall this afternoon, he remarked.
What do you think, watson?
I have nothing to do to day.
My practice is never very absorbing.
Then put on your hat and come.
It is introspective, and i want to introspect.
Third right, fourth left, answered the assistant promptly, closing the door.
Smart fellow, that, observed holmes as we walked away.
I have known something of him before.
The knees of his trousers.
And what did you see?
What i expected to see.
Why did you beat the pavement?
My dear doctor, this is a time for observation, not for talk.
We are spies in an enemy’s country.
We know something of saxe coburg square.
Let us now explore the parts which lie behind it.
It is a hobby of mine to have an exact knowledge of london.
That carries us right on to the other block.
And now, doctor, we’ve done our work, so it’s time we had some play.
You want to go home, no doubt, doctor, he remarked as we emerged.
Yes, it would be as well.
And i have some business to do which will take some hours.
This business at coburg square is serious.
A considerable crime is in contemplation.
I have every reason to believe that we shall be in time to stop it.
But to day being saturday rather complicates matters.
I shall want your help to night.
Ten will be early enough.
I shall be at baker street at ten.
What was this nocturnal expedition, and why should i go armed?
Where were we going, and what were we to do?
Watson, i think you know mr. jones, of scotland yard?
We’re hunting in couples again, doctor, you see, said jones in his consequential way.
Our friend here is a wonderful man for starting a chase.
All he wants is an old dog to help him to do the running down.
You may place considerable confidence in mr. holmes, sir, said the police agent loftily.
Still, i confess that i miss my rubber.
John clay, the murderer, thief, smasher, and forger.
He’s a remarkable man, is young john clay.
His grandfather was a royal duke, and he himself has been to eton and oxford.
I’ve been on his track for years and have never set eyes on him yet.
I hope that i may have the pleasure of introducing you to night.
It is past ten, however, and quite time that we started.
We are close there now, my friend remarked.
This fellow merryweather is a bank director, and personally interested in the matter.
I thought it as well to have jones with us also.
He has one positive virtue.
Here we are, and they are waiting for us.
Within there was a small corridor, which ended in a very massive iron gate.
Why, dear me, it sounds quite hollow!
He remarked, looking up in surprise.
I must really ask you to be a little more quiet!
You have already imperilled the whole success of our expedition.
It is our french gold, whispered the director.
We have had several warnings that an attempt might be made upon it.
Which were very well justified, observed holmes.
And now it is time that we arranged our little plans.
I expect that within an hour matters will come to a head.
In the meantime mr. merryweather, we must put the screen over that dark lantern.
And sit in the dark?
And, first of all, we must choose our positions.
I shall stand behind this crate, and do you conceal yourselves behind those.
Then, when i flash a light upon them, close in swiftly.
If they fire, watson, have no compunction about shooting them down.
They have but one retreat, whispered holmes.
That is back through the house into saxe coburg square.
I hope that you have done what i asked you, jones?
I have an inspector and two officers waiting at the front door.
Then we have stopped all the holes.
And now we must be silent and wait.
What a time it seemed!
From my position i could look over the case in the direction of the floor.
Suddenly my eyes caught the glint of a light.
At first it was but a lurid spark upon the stone pavement.
Its disappearance, however, was but momentary.
It’s all clear, he whispered.
Have you the chisel and the bags?
Jump, archie, jump, and i’ll swing for it!
Sherlock holmes had sprung out and seized the intruder by the collar.
It’s no use, john clay, said holmes blandly.
You have no chance at all.
So i see, the other answered with the utmost coolness.
There are three men waiting for him at the door, said holmes.
You seem to have done the thing very completely.
And i you, holmes answered.
Your red headed idea was very new and effective.
You’ll see your pal again presently, said jones.
He’s quicker at climbing down holes than i am.
Just hold out while i fix the derbies.
You may not be aware that i have royal blood in my veins.
That is better, said john clay serenely.
But how could you guess what the motive was?
Had there been women in the house, i should have suspected a mere vulgar intrigue.
That, however, was out of the question.
It must, then, be something out of the house.
There was the end of this tangled clue.
What could it be, once more?
So far i had got when we went to visit the scene of action.
I surprised you by beating upon the pavement with my stick.
I was ascertaining whether the cellar stretched out in front or behind.
It was not in front.
Then i rang the bell, and, as i hoped, the assistant answered it.
We have had some skirmishes, but we had never set eyes upon each other before.
I hardly looked at his face.
His knees were what i wished to see.
You must yourself have remarked how worn, wrinkled, and stained they were.
They spoke of those hours of burrowing.
The only remaining point was what they were burrowing for.
And how could you tell that they would make their attempt to night?
For all these reasons i expected them to come to night.
You reasoned it out beautifully, i exclaimed in unfeigned admiration.
It is so long a chain, and yet every link rings true.
It saved me from ennui, he answered, yawning.
I already feel it closing in upon me.
My life is spent in one long effort to escape from the commonplaces of existence.
These little problems help me to do so.
And you are a benefactor of the race, said i.
Well, perhaps, after all, it is of some little use, he remarked.
L’homme c’est rien l’œuvre c’est tout ,’ as gustave flaubert wrote to george sand.
We would not dare to conceive the things which are really mere commonplaces of existence.
And yet i am not convinced of it, i answered.
A certain selection and discretion must be used in producing a realistic effect, remarked holmes.
Depend upon it, there is nothing so unnatural as the commonplace.
I smiled and shook my head.
I can quite understand your thinking so, i said.
Here is the first heading upon which i come.
The crudest of writers could invent nothing more crude.
Ah, said he, i forgot that i had not seen you for some weeks.
I asked, glancing at a remarkable brilliant which sparkled upon his finger.
And have you any on hand just now?
Some ten or twelve, but none which present any feature of interest.
They are important, you understand, without being interesting.
I have seen those symptoms before, said holmes, throwing his cigarette into the fire.
Oscillation upon the pavement always means an affaire de cœur .
And yet even here we may discriminate.
But here she comes in person to resolve our doubts.
You’ve heard about me, mr. holmes, she cried, else how could you know all that?
Never mind, said holmes, laughing it is my business to know things.
Perhaps i have trained myself to see what others overlook.
If not, why should you come to consult me?
Oh, mr. holmes, i wish you would do as much for me.
Why did you come away to consult me in such a hurry?
Asked sherlock holmes, with his finger tips together and his eyes to the ceiling.
Again a startled look came over the somewhat vacuous face of miss mary sutherland.
Your father, said holmes, your stepfather, surely, since the name is different.
And your mother is alive?
Oh, yes, mother is alive and well.
Your own little income, he asked, does it come out of the business?
It is quite separate and was left me by my uncle ned in auckland.
Two thousand five hundred pounds was the amount, but i can only touch the interest.
You interest me extremely, said holmes.
Of course, that is only just for the time.
You have made your position very clear to me, said holmes.
Kindly tell us now all about your connection with mr. hosmer angel.
I met him first at the gasfitters’ ball, she said.
Mr. windibank did not wish us to go.
He never did wish us to go anywhere.
Oh, well, he was very good about it.
Well, you know father didn’t like anything of the sort.
But how about mr. hosmer angel?
Did he make no attempt to see you?
We could write in the meantime, and he used to write every day.
Were you engaged to the gentleman at this time?
We were engaged after the first walk that we took.
Hosmer mr. angel was a cashier in an office in leadenhall street and what office?
That’s the worst of it, mr. holmes, i don’t know.
Where did he live, then?
He slept on the premises.
And you don’t know his address?
No except that it was leadenhall street.
Where did you address your letters, then?
To the leadenhall street post office, to be left till called for.
It was most suggestive, said holmes.
Can you remember any other little things about mr. hosmer angel?
He was a very shy man, mr. holmes.
Very retiring and gentlemanly he was.
Even his voice was gentle.
Well, and what happened when mr. windibank, your stepfather, returned to france?
I didn’t quite like that, mr. holmes.
Yes, sir for he had started to england just before it arrived.
Your wedding was arranged, then, for the friday.
Was it to be in church?
Yes, sir, but very quietly.
It seems to me that you have been very shamefully treated, said holmes.
He was too good and kind to leave me so.
Your own opinion is, then, that some unforeseen catastrophe has occurred to him?
I believe that he foresaw some danger, or else he would not have talked so.
And then i think that what he foresaw happened.
But you have no notion as to what it could have been?
How did your mother take the matter?
She was angry, and said that i was never to speak of the matter again.
And yet, what could have happened?
And why could he not write?
Then you don’t think i’ll see him again?
Then what has happened to him?
You will leave that question in my hands.
I advertised for him in last saturday’s chronicle , said she.
Here is the slip and here are four letters from him.
Mr. angel’s address you never had, i understand.
Where is your father’s place of business?
He travels for westhouse marbank, the great claret importers of fenchurch street.
You have made your statement very clearly.
You will leave the papers here, and remember the advice which i have given you.
You are very kind, mr. holmes, but i cannot do that.
I shall be true to hosmer.
He shall find me ready when he comes back.
Quite an interesting study, that maiden, he observed.
But the maiden herself was most instructive.
Not invisible but unnoticed, watson.
You did not know where to look, and so you missed all that was important.
Now, what did you gather from that woman’s appearance?
Her gloves were greyish and were worn through at the right forefinger.
Her boots i didn’t observe.
Sherlock holmes clapped his hands softly together and chuckled.
’pon my word, watson, you are coming along wonderfully.
You have really done very well indeed.
Never trust to general impressions, my boy, but concentrate yourself upon details.
My first glance is always at a woman’s sleeve.
In a man it is perhaps better first to take the knee of the trouser.
But, surely, it was obvious.
I asked, keenly interested, as i always was, by my friend’s incisive reasoning.
She had written in a hurry and dipped her pen too deep.
All this is amusing, though rather elementary, but i must go back to business, watson.
Would you mind reading me the advertised description of mr. hosmer angel?
I held the little printed slip to the light.
Missing, it said, on the morning of the fourteenth, a gentleman named hosmer angel.
About five ft. seven in.
Known to have been employed in an office in leadenhall street.
Anybody bringing, c, c. that will do, said holmes.
As to the letters, he continued, glancing over them, they are very commonplace.
Absolutely no clue in them to mr. angel, save that he quotes balzac once.
There is one remarkable point, however, which will no doubt strike you.
They are typewritten, i remarked.
Not only that, but the signature is typewritten.
Look at the neat little hosmer angel’ at the bottom.
The point about the signature is very suggestive in fact, we may call it conclusive.
No, that was not the point.
However, i shall write two letters, which should settle the matter.
It is just as well that we should do business with the male relatives.
Well, have you solved it?
I asked as i entered.
It was the bisulphate of baryta.
I thought of the salt that i have been working upon.
Who was he, then, and what was his object in deserting miss sutherland?
This is the girl’s stepfather, mr. james windibank, said holmes.
He has written to me to say that he would be here at six.
Good evening, mr. james windibank, said holmes.
Besides, it is a useless expense, for how could you possibly find this hosmer angel?
Mr. windibank gave a violent start and dropped his gloves.
I am delighted to hear it, he said.
Unless they are quite new, no two of them write exactly alike.
Some letters get more worn than others, and some wear only on one side.
It is a subject to which i have devoted some little attention.
I have here four letters which purport to come from the missing man.
Mr. windibank sprang out of his chair and picked up his hat.
I cannot waste time over this sort of fantastic talk, mr. holmes, he said.
Certainly, said holmes, stepping over and turning the key in the door.
I let you know, then, that i have caught him!
Oh, it won’t do really it won’t, said holmes suavely.
There is no possible getting out of it, mr. windibank.
Sit down and let us talk it over.
It it’s not actionable, he stammered.
I am very much afraid that it is not.
It was worth an effort to preserve it.
But soon he found that that would not answer forever.
What does her clever stepfather do then?
He conceives an idea more creditable to his head than to his heart.
It was only a joke at first, groaned our visitor.
We never thought that she would have been so carried away.
But the deception could not be kept up forever.
These pretended journeys to france were rather cumbrous.
I think that was the chain of events, mr. windibank!
There’s a cold blooded scoundrel!
Said holmes, laughing, as he threw himself down into his chair once more.
The case has, in some respects, been not entirely devoid of interest.
I cannot now entirely see all the steps of your reasoning, i remarked.
And how did you verify them?
Having once spotted my man, it was easy to get corroboration.
I knew the firm for which this man worked.
Having taken the printed description.
As i expected, his reply was typewritten and revealed the same trivial but characteristic defects.
If i tell her she will not believe me.
Shall be glad if you will come with me.
What do you say, dear?
Said my wife, looking across at me.
I really don’t know what to say.
I have a fairly long list at present.
Oh, anstruther would do your work for you.
You have been looking a little pale lately.
It is really very good of you to come, watson, said he.
Local aid is always either worthless or else biassed.
If you will keep the two corner seats i shall get the tickets.
Have you heard anything of the case?
I have not seen a paper for some days.
The london press has not had very full accounts.
That sounds a little paradoxical.
But it is profoundly true.
Singularity is almost invariably a clue.
It is a murder, then?
Well, it is conjectured to be so.
Boscombe valley is a country district not very far from ross, in herefordshire.
Mccarthy kept two servants a man and a girl.
Turner had a considerable household, some half dozen at the least.
That is as much as i have been able to gather about the families.
From that appointment he never came back alive.
Both these witnesses depose that mr. mccarthy was walking alone.
The head had been beaten in by repeated blows of some heavy and blunt weapon.
I could hardly imagine a more damning case, i remarked.
If ever circumstantial evidence pointed to a criminal it does so here.
Circumstantial evidence is a very tricky thing, answered holmes thoughtfully.
There is nothing more deceptive than an obvious fact, he answered, laughing.
How on earth my dear fellow, i know you well.
I know the military neatness which characterises you.
I only quote this as a trivial example of observation and inference.
It was a confession, i ejaculated.
No, for it was followed by a protestation of innocence.
Many men have been hanged on far slighter evidence, i remarked.
And many men have been wrongfully hanged.
What is the young man’s own account of the matter?
You will find it here, and may read it for yourself.
I settled myself down in the corner of the carriage and read it very carefully.
I had no idea that he was in front of me.
When about a hundred yards from the pool i heard a cry of cooee!
Which was a usual signal between my father and myself.
I then hurried forward, and found him standing by the pool.
Seeing that his passion was becoming ungovernable, i left him and returned towards hatherley farm.
I found my father expiring upon the ground, with his head terribly injured.
I dropped my gun and held him in my arms, but he almost instantly expired.
The coroner what did you understand by that?
Witness it conveyed no meaning to me.
I thought that he was delirious.
Witness i should prefer not to answer.
The coroner i am afraid that i must press it.
Witness it is really impossible for me to tell you.
The coroner that is for the court to decide.
Witness i must still refuse.
Witness i do not know.
The coroner what do you mean?
When i rose from my father i looked round for it, but it was gone.
They are all, as he remarks, very much against the son.
Holmes laughed softly to himself and stretched himself out upon the cushioned seat.
We lunch at swindon, and i see that we shall be there in twenty minutes.
I have ordered a carriage, said lestrade as we sat over a cup of tea.
It was very nice and complimentary of you, holmes answered.
It is entirely a question of barometric pressure.
I do not quite follow, he said.
No wind, and not a cloud in the sky.
You have, no doubt, already formed your conclusions from the newspapers, he said.
Still, of course, one can’t refuse a lady, and such a very positive one, too.
Here is her carriage at the door.
I have driven down to tell you so.
I know that james didn’t do it.
I know it, and i want you to start upon your work knowing it, too.
Never let yourself doubt upon that point.
Such a charge is absurd to anyone who really knows him.
I hope we may clear him, miss turner, said sherlock holmes.
You may rely upon my doing all that i can.
But you have read the evidence.
You have formed some conclusion?
Do you not see some loophole, some flaw?
Do you not yourself think that he is innocent?
I think that it is very probable.
She cried, throwing back her head and looking defiantly at lestrade.
I know that he is right.
It is no time for me to hide anything.
James and his father had many disagreements about me.
Mr. mccarthy was very anxious that there should be a marriage between us.
So there were quarrels, and this, i am sure, was one of them.
Was he in favour of such a union?
No, he was averse to it also.
No one but mr. mccarthy was in favour of it.
Thank you for this information, said he.
May i see your father if i call to morrow?
I am afraid the doctor won’t allow it.
Yes, have you not heard?
Quite so at the gold mines, where, as i understand, mr. turner made his money.
You have been of material assistance to me.
You will tell me if you have any news to morrow.
No doubt you will go to the prison to see james.
Good bye, and god help you in your undertaking.
I am ashamed of you, holmes, said lestrade with dignity after a few minutes’ silence.
Why should you raise up hopes which you are bound to disappoint?
I am not over tender of heart, but i call it cruel.
I think that i see my way to clearing james mccarthy, said holmes.
Have you an order to see him in prison?
Yes, but only for you and me.
Then i shall reconsider my resolution about going out.
We have still time to take a train to hereford and see him to night?
Then let us do so.
It was something terrible and deadly.
Might not the nature of the injuries reveal something to my medical instincts?
I marked the spot upon my own head.
Clearly such a blow must have been struck from behind.
Still, it might be worth while to call holmes’ attention to it.
Then there was the peculiar dying reference to a rat.
It could not be delirium.
A man dying from a sudden blow does not commonly become delirious.
But what could it indicate?
I cudgelled my brains to find some possible explanation.
And then the incident of the grey cloth seen by young mccarthy.
What a tissue of mysteries and improbabilities the whole thing was!
It was late before sherlock holmes returned.
He came back alone, for lestrade was staying in lodgings in the town.
The glass still keeps very high, he remarked as he sat down.
I have seen young mccarthy.
And what did you learn from him?
Could he throw no light?
Ah, thereby hangs a rather painful tale.
But if he is innocent, who has done it?
I would call your attention very particularly to two points.
Those are the crucial points upon which the case depends.
There was no rain, as holmes had foretold, and the morning broke bright and cloudless.
There is serious news this morning, lestrade observed.
An elderly man, i presume?
This business has had a very bad effect upon him.
That is interesting, said holmes.
In a hundred other ways he has helped him.
Everybody about here speaks of his kindness to him.
The daughter told us as much.
Do you not deduce something from that?
We have got to the deductions and the inferences, said lestrade, winking at me.
Well, moonshine is a brighter thing than fog, said holmes, laughing.
But i am very much mistaken if this is not hatherley farm upon the left.
Sherlock holmes was transformed when he was hot upon such a scent as this.
His face flushed and darkened.
What did you go into the pool for?
I fished about with a rake.
I thought there might be some weapon or other trace.
But how on earth oh, tut, tut!
That left foot of yours with its inward twist is all over the place.
A mole could trace it, and there it vanishes among the reeds.
But here are three separate tracks of the same feet.
These are young mccarthy’s feet.
That bears out his story.
He ran when he saw his father on the ground.
Then here are the father’s feet as he paced up and down.
It is the butt end of the gun as the son stood listening.
Square, too, quite unusual boots!
They come, they go, they come again of course that was for the cloak.
Now where did they come from?
It has been a case of considerable interest, he remarked, returning to his natural manner.
I fancy that this grey house on the right must be the lodge.
Having done that, we may drive back to our luncheon.
You may walk to the cab, and i shall be with you presently.
This may interest you, lestrade, he remarked, holding it out.
The murder was done with it.
How do you know, then?
The grass was growing under it.
It had only lain there a few days.
There was no sign of a place whence it had been taken.
It corresponds with the injuries.
There is no sign of any other weapon.
I am afraid that i am still a sceptic, he said.
Nous verrons , answered holmes calmly.
You work your own method, and i shall work mine.
And leave your case unfinished?
Who was the criminal, then?
Surely it would not be difficult to find out.
This is not such a populous neighbourhood.
I should become the laughing stock of scotland yard.
All right, said holmes quietly.
I have given you the chance.
I shall drop you a line before i leave.
I don’t know quite what to do, and i should value your advice.
Light a cigar and let me expound.
The other was his singular dying reference to a rat.
He mumbled several words, you understand, but that was all that caught the son’s ear.
What of this cooee!’ then?
Well, obviously it could not have been meant for the son.
The son, as far as he knew, was in bristol.
It was mere chance that he was within earshot.
But cooee’ is a distinctly australian cry, and one which is used between australians.
What of the rat, then?
This is a map of the colony of victoria, he said.
I wired to bristol for it last night.
He put his hand over part of the map.
He was trying to utter the name of his murderer.
So and so, of ballarat.
And now, you see, i had narrowed the field down considerably.
Then comes our expedition of to day.
But how did you gain them?
It is founded upon the observation of trifles.
His height i know that you might roughly judge from the length of his stride.
His boots, too, might be told from their traces.
Yes, they were peculiar boots.
The impression of his right foot was always less distinct than his left.
He put less weight upon it.
Because he limped he was lame.
The blow was struck from immediately behind, and yet was upon the left side.
Now, how can that be unless it were by a left handed man?
He had stood behind that tree during the interview between the father and son.
He had even smoked there.
It was an indian cigar, of the variety which are rolled in rotterdam.
I could see that the end had not been in his mouth.
Therefore he used a holder.
I see the direction in which all this points.
The man who entered was a strange and impressive figure.
Pray sit down on the sofa, said holmes gently.
Yes, the lodge keeper brought it up.
You said that you wished to see me here to avoid scandal.
I thought people would talk if i went to the hall.
And why did you wish to see me?
Yes, said holmes, answering the look rather than the words.
I know all about mccarthy.
The old man sank his face in his hands.
But i would not have let the young man come to harm.
I am glad to hear you say so, said holmes gravely.
I would have spoken now had it not been for my dear girl.
It may not come to that, said holmes.
I am no official agent.
Young mccarthy must be got off, however.
I am a dying man, said old turner.
I have had diabetes for years.
My doctor says it is a question whether i shall live a month.
Yet i would rather die under my own roof than in a gaol.
Just tell us the truth, he said.
I shall jot down the facts.
You will sign it, and watson here can witness it.
Then i could produce your confession at the last extremity to save young mccarthy.
I promise you that i shall not use it unless it is absolutely needed.
You didn’t know this dead man, mccarthy.
He was a devil incarnate.
God keep you out of the clutches of such a man as he.
His grip has been upon me these twenty years, and he has blasted my life.
I’ll tell you first how i came to be in his power.
Three of our boys were killed, however, before we got the swag.
All was going well when mccarthy laid his grip upon me.
But there i was firm.
I braved him to do his worst.
We were to meet at the pool midway between our houses to talk it over.
Could i not snap the bond?
I was already a dying and a desperate man.
But my memory and my girl!
Both could be saved if i could but silence that foul tongue.
I did it, mr. holmes.
I would do it again.
That is the true story, gentlemen, of all that occurred.
I pray that we may never be exposed to such a temptation.
And what do you intend to do?
In view of your health, nothing.
Farewell, then, said the old man solemnly.
Tottering and shaking in all his giant frame, he stumbled slowly from the room.
Said holmes after a long silence.
Why does fate play such tricks with poor, helpless worms?
Why, said i, glancing up at my companion, that was surely the bell.
Who could come to night?
Some friend of yours, perhaps?
Except yourself i have none, he answered.
I do not encourage visitors.
If so, it is a serious case.
I owe you an apology, he said, raising his golden pince nez to his eyes.
I trust that i am not intruding.
Give me your coat and umbrella, said holmes.
They may rest here on the hook and will be dry presently.
You have come up from the south west, i see.
That clay and chalk mixture which i see upon your toe caps is quite distinctive.
I have come for advice.
That is not always so easy.
I have heard of you, mr. holmes.
I heard from major prendergast how you saved him in the tankerville club scandal.
He was wrongfully accused of cheating at cards.
He said that you could solve anything.
That you are never beaten.
I have been beaten four times three times by men, and once by a woman.
But what is that compared with the number of your successes?
It is true that i have been generally successful.
Then you may be so with me.
It is no ordinary one.
None of those which come to me are.
I am the last court of appeal.
You fill me with interest, said holmes.
From india!’ said he as he took it up, pondicherry postmark!
There was nothing else save the five dried pips.
What could be the reason of his overpowering terror?
I wish you, john,’ said my uncle, to witness my will.
If you can enjoy it in peace, well and good!
I could see a change in my uncle, however.
He drank more than ever, and he was less inclined for any sort of society.
We found the brass box there, although its contents had been destroyed.
Why, what on earth does this mean, john?’ he stammered.
My heart had turned to lead.
It is k. k. k.,’ said i.
He looked inside the envelope.
So it is,’ he cried.
Here are the very letters.
The sundial in the garden.
We are in a civilised land here, and we can’t have tomfoolery of this kind.
Where does the thing come from?’ from dundee,’ i answered, glancing at the postmark.
Some preposterous practical joke,’ said he.
What have i to do with sundials and papers?
And be laughed at for my pains.
Nothing of the sort.’ then let me do so?’ no, i forbid you.
I went about, however, with a heart which was full of forebodings.
In that, however, i was in error.
I hurried to him, but he passed away without having ever recovered his consciousness.
In this sinister way i came into my inheritance.
You will ask me why i did not dispose of it?
This is the envelope, he continued.
The postmark is london eastern division.
You must act, man, or you are lost.
Nothing but energy can save you.
This is no time for despair.
I have seen the police.
But they listened to my story with a smile.
Holmes shook his clenched hands in the air.
They have, however, allowed me a policeman, who may remain in the house with me.
Has he come with you to night?
His orders were to stay in the house.
Again holmes raved in the air.
Why did you come to me?
He said, and, above all, why did you not come at once?
It is really two days since you had the letter.
We should have acted before this.
There is one thing, said john openshaw.
Beyond the mention of pips, i do not see that it helps us much.
I think myself that it is a page from some private diary.
The writing is undoubtedly my uncle’s.
Set the pips on mccauley, paramore, and john swain of st. augustine.
Said holmes, folding up the paper and returning it to our visitor.
And now you must on no account lose another instant.
We cannot spare time even to discuss what you have told me.
You must get home instantly and act.
There is but one thing to do.
It must be done at once.
You must assert that in such words as will carry conviction with them.
Do not think of revenge, or anything of the sort, at present.
The first consideration is to remove the pressing danger which threatens you.
The second is to clear up the mystery and to punish the guilty parties.
I thank you, said the young man, rising and pulling on his overcoat.
You have given me fresh life and hope.
I shall certainly do as you advise.
Do not lose an instant.
How do you go back?
It is not yet nine.
The streets will be crowded, so i trust that you may be in safety.
And yet you cannot guard yourself too closely.
To morrow i shall set to work upon your case.
I shall see you at horsham, then?
No, your secret lies in london.
It is there that i shall seek it.
I shall take your advice in every particular.
He shook hands with us and took his leave.
Outside the wind still screamed and the rain splashed and pattered against the windows.
Save, perhaps, the sign of four.
But have you, i asked, formed any definite conception as to what these perils are?
There can be no question as to their nature, he answered.
Who is this k. k. k., and why does he pursue this unhappy family?
We have not yet grasped the results which the reason alone can attain to.
It was a singular document.
Philosophy, astronomy, and politics were marked at zero, i remember.
Those, i think, were the main points of my analysis.
Holmes grinned at the last item.
Now let us consider the situation and see what may be deduced from it.
Did you remark the postmarks of those letters?
The first was from pondicherry, the second from dundee, and the third from london.
What do you deduce from that?
That the writer was on board of a ship.
We have already a clue.
And now let us consider another point.
A greater distance to travel.
But the letter had also a greater distance to come.
Then i do not see the point.
You see how quickly the deed followed the sign when it came from dundee.
But, as a matter of fact, seven weeks elapsed.
But this one comes from london, and therefore we cannot count upon delay.
What can it mean, this relentless persecution?
Their papers they mean to have, be the holder of them who it may.
Holmes turned over the leaves of the book upon his knee.
Here it is, said he presently ku klux klan.
A name derived from the fanciful resemblance to the sound produced by cocking a rifle.
It may well have been cause and effect.
Then the page we have seen is such as we might expect.
Sherlock holmes was already at breakfast when i came down.
What steps will you take?
It will very much depend upon the results of my first inquiries.
I may have to go down to horsham, after all.
You will not go there first?
No, i shall commence with the city.
Just ring the bell and the maid will bring up your coffee.
It rested upon a heading which sent a chill to my heart.
Holmes, i cried, you are too late.
Said he, laying down his cup, i feared as much.
He spoke calmly, but i could see that he was deeply moved.
That hurts my pride, watson, he said at last.
It is a petty feeling, no doubt, but it hurts my pride.
They must be cunning devils, he exclaimed at last.
How could they have decoyed him down there?
The embankment is not on the direct line to the station.
The bridge, no doubt, was too crowded, even on such a night, for their purpose.
Well, watson, we shall see who will win in the long run.
I am going out now!
No i shall be my own police.
When i have spun the web they may take the flies, but not before.
Sherlock holmes had not come back yet.
It was nearly ten o’clock before he entered, looking pale and worn.
You are hungry, i remarked.
It had escaped my memory.
I have had nothing since breakfast.
I had no time to think of it.
And how have you succeeded?
I have them in the hollow of my hand.
Young openshaw shall not long remain unavenged.
Why, watson, let us put their own devilish trade mark upon them.
It is well thought of!
Of these he took five and thrust them into an envelope.
On the inside of the flap he wrote s. h. for j. o.
That will await him when he enters port, said he, chuckling.
It may give him a sleepless night.
And who is this captain calhoun?
The leader of the gang.
I shall have the others, but he first.
How did you trace it, then?
There were thirty six ships of fair tonnage which were reported there during those months.
The lone star had arrived here last week.
What will you do, then?
Oh, i have my hand upon him.
The others are finns and germans.
I know, also, that they were all three away from the ship last night.
I had it from the stevedore who has been loading their cargo.
Very long and very severe were the equinoctial gales that year.
You’ll have to go out.
I groaned, for i was newly come back from a weary day.
Oh, i’m in such trouble!
She cried i do so want a little help.
Why, said my wife, pulling up her veil, it is kate whitney.
How you startled me, kate!
I had not an idea who you were when you came in.
I didn’t know what to do, so i came straight to you.
That was always the way.
Folk who were in grief came to my wife like birds to a lighthouse.
It was very sweet of you to come.
Or should you rather that i sent james off to bed?
I want the doctor’s advice and help, too.
He has not been home for two days.
I am so frightened about him!
We soothed and comforted her by such words as we could find.
Did she know where her husband was?
Was it possible that we could bring him back to her?
It seems that it was.
But what was she to do?
There was the case, and of course there was but one way out of it.
Might i not escort her to this place?
And then, as a second thought, why should she come at all?
I was isa whitney’s medical adviser, and as such i had influence over him.
I could manage it better if i were alone.
But there was no great difficulty in the first stage of my adventure.
I have not come to stay, said i.
He was in a pitiable state of reaction, with every nerve in a twitter.
I say, watson, what o’clock is it?
I thought it was wednesday.
What d’you want to frighten a chap for?
I tell you that it is friday, man.
Your wife has been waiting this two days for you.
You should be ashamed of yourself!
But i’ll go home with you.
I wouldn’t frighten kate poor little kate.
Yes, i have one waiting.
Then i shall go in it.
But i must owe something.
Find what i owe, watson.
I am all off colour.
I can do nothing for myself.
The words fell quite distinctly upon my ear.
I took two steps forward and looked back.
He had turned his back so that none could see him but i.
I whispered, what on earth are you doing in this den?
As low as you can, he answered i have excellent ears.
I have a cab outside.
Then pray send him home in it.
If you will wait outside, i shall be with you in five minutes.
For two streets he shuffled along with a bent back and an uncertain foot.
I was certainly surprised to find you there.
But not more so than i to find you.
I came to find a friend.
And i to find an enemy.
Yes one of my natural enemies, or, shall i say, my natural prey.
You do not mean bodies?
But our trap should be here.
You’ll come with me, won’t you?
If i can be of use.
Oh, a trusty comrade is always of use and a chronicler still more so.
My room at the cedars is a double bedded one.
Yes that is mr. st. clair’s house.
I am staying there while i conduct the inquiry.
We have a seven mile drive before us.
But i am all in the dark.
You’ll know all about it presently.
All right, john we shall not need you.
Look out for me to morrow, about eleven.
You have a grand gift of silence, watson, said he.
It makes you quite invaluable as a companion.
You forget that i know nothing about it.
It seems absurdly simple, and yet, somehow i can get nothing to go upon.
Have you followed me so far?
There was no sign of him there.
Out there fell a cascade of children’s bricks.
It was the toy which he had promised to bring home.
The rooms were carefully examined, and results all pointed to an abominable crime.
The bedroom window was a broad one and opened from below.
His boots, his socks, his hat, and his watch all were there.
And now as to the villains who seemed to be immediately implicated in the matter.
So much for the lascar manager.
What could he have done single handed against a man in the prime of life?
And what do you think they found in the pockets?
No, i don’t think you would guess.
It was no wonder that it had not been swept away by the tide.
But a human body is a different matter.
There is a fierce eddy between the wharf and the house.
But i understand that all the other clothes were found in the room.
Would the body be dressed in a coat alone?
No, sir, but the facts might be met speciously enough.
What would he do then?
There is not an instant to be lost.
Well, we will take it as a working hypothesis for want of a better.
We are on the outskirts of lee, said my companion.
See that light among the trees?
But why are you not conducting the case from baker street?
Because there are many inquiries which must be made out here.
I hate to meet her, watson, when i have no news of her husband.
You must be weary, for you have had a long day.
This is my friend, dr. watson.
I am delighted to see you, said she, pressing my hand warmly.
Do not trouble about my feelings.
I am not hysterical, nor given to fainting.
I simply wish to hear your real, real opinion.
In your heart of hearts, do you think that neville is alive?
Sherlock holmes seemed to be embarrassed by the question.
Frankly, then, madam, i do not.
You think that he is dead?
And on what day did he meet his death?
Sherlock holmes sprang out of his chair as if he had been galvanised.
She stood smiling, holding up a little slip of paper in the air.
I had left my chair and was gazing at it over his shoulder.
Surely this is not your husband’s writing, madam.
No, but the enclosure is.
How can you tell that?
The name, you see, is in perfectly black ink, which has dried itself.
The rest is of the greyish colour, which shows that blotting paper has been used.
It is, of course, a trifle, but there is nothing so important as trifles.
Let us now see the letter.
There has been an enclosure here!
Yes, there was a ring.
And you are sure that this is your husband’s hand?
His hand when he wrote hurriedly.
It is very unlike his usual writing, and yet i know it well.
Dearest do not be frightened.
There is a huge error which it may take some little time to rectify.
Posted to day in gravesend by a man with a dirty thumb.
And you have no doubt that it is your husband’s hand, madam?
And they were posted to day at gravesend.
But he must be alive, mr. holmes.
Unless this is a clever forgery to put us on the wrong scent.
The ring, after all, proves nothing.
It may have been taken from him.
No, no it is, it is his very own writing!
It may, however, have been written on monday and only posted to day.
If so, much may have happened between.
Oh, you must not discourage me, mr. holmes.
I know that all is well with him.
And on monday he made no remarks before leaving you?
And you were surprised to see him in swandam lane?
Then he might have called to you?
He only, as i understand, gave an inarticulate cry?
A call for help, you thought?
But it might have been a cry of surprise.
Astonishment at the unexpected sight of you might cause him to throw up his hands?
And you thought he was pulled back?
He might have leaped back.
You did not see anyone else in the room?
Your husband, as far as you could see, had his ordinary clothes on?
But without his collar or tie.
I distinctly saw his bare throat.
Had he ever spoken of swandam lane?
Had he ever showed any signs of having taken opium?
Thank you, mrs. st. clair.
Those are the principal points about which i wished to be absolutely clear.
Game for a morning drive?
As i dressed i glanced at my watch.
It was no wonder that no one was stirring.
It was twenty five minutes past four.
I want to test a little theory of mine, said he, pulling on his boots.
I deserve to be kicked from here to charing cross.
But i think i have the key of the affair now.
In the bathroom, he answered.
Oh, yes, i am not joking, he continued, seeing my look of incredulity.
Come on, my boy, and we shall see whether it will not fit the lock.
We both sprang in, and away we dashed down the london road.
One of them held the horse’s head while the other led us in.
Ah, bradstreet, how are you?
I wish to have a quiet word with you, bradstreet.
Step into my room here.
The inspector sat down at his desk.
What can i do for you, mr. holmes?
He was brought up and remanded for further inquiries.
Oh, he gives no trouble.
But he is a dirty scoundrel.
I should like to see him very much.
You can leave your bag.
No, i think that i’ll take it.
The third on the right is his, said the inspector.
He is asleep, said he.
You can see him very well.
We both put our eyes to the grating.
A shock of very bright red hair grew low over his eyes and forehead.
He’s a beauty, isn’t he?
He certainly needs a wash, remarked holmes.
You are a funny one, chuckled the inspector.
Well, i don’t know why not, said the inspector.
He doesn’t look a credit to the bow street cells, does he?
He slipped his key into the lock, and we all very quietly entered the cell.
The sleeper half turned, and then settled down once more into a deep slumber.
Never in my life have i seen such a sight.
The man’s face peeled off under the sponge like the bark from a tree.
Gone was the coarse brown tint!
Cried the inspector, it is, indeed, the missing man.
I know him from the photograph.
Be it so, said he.
And pray what am i charged with?
No crime, but a very great error has been committed, said holmes.
You would have done better to have trusted your wife.
It was not the wife it was the children, groaned the prisoner.
God help me, i would not have them ashamed of their father.
The case would then never go into court at all.
You are the first who have ever heard my story.
My father was a schoolmaster in chesterfield, where i received an excellent education.
There was the point from which all my adventures started.
I took advantage now of my attainments.
In ten days i had the money and had paid the debt.
Only one man knew my secret.
Well, very soon i found that i was saving considerable sums of money.
My dear wife knew that i had business in the city.
I heard her voice downstairs, but i knew that she could not ascend.
Even a wife’s eyes could not pierce so complete a disguise.
I hurled it out of the window, and it disappeared into the thames.
I do not know that there is anything else for me to explain.
That note only reached her yesterday, said holmes.
What a week she must have spent!
That was it, said holmes, nodding approvingly i have no doubt of it.
But have you never been prosecuted for begging?
Many times but what was a fine to me?
It must stop here, however, said bradstreet.
I have sworn it by the most solemn oaths which a man can take.
But if you are found again, then all must come out.
I wish i knew how you reach your results.
You are engaged, said i perhaps i interrupt you.
I am glad to have a friend with whom i can discuss my results.
No crime, said sherlock holmes, laughing.
We have already had experience of such.
You know peterson, the commissionaire?
It is to him that this trophy belongs.
No, no, he found it.
And, first, as to how it came here.
Which surely he restored to their owner?
My dear fellow, there lies the problem.
What, then, did peterson do?
Then, what clue could you have as to his identity?
Only as much as we can deduce.
What can you gather from this old battered felt?
I took the tattered object in my hands and turned it over rather ruefully.
The lining had been of red silk, but was a good deal discoloured.
It was pierced in the brim for a hat securer, but the elastic was missing.
I can see nothing, said i, handing it back to my friend.
On the contrary, watson, you can see everything.
You fail, however, to reason from what you see.
You are too timid in drawing your inferences.
Then, pray tell me what it is that you can infer from this hat?
He has, however, retained some degree of self respect, he continued, disregarding my remonstrance.
These are the more patent facts which are to be deduced from his hat.
You are certainly joking, holmes.
For example, how did you deduce that this man was intellectual?
For answer holmes clapped the hat upon his head.
It came right over the forehead and settled upon the bridge of his nose.
The decline of his fortunes, then?
This hat is three years old.
These flat brims curled at the edge came in then.
It is a hat of the very best quality.
Look at the band of ribbed silk and the excellent lining.
Well, that is clear enough, certainly.
But how about the foresight and the moral retrogression?
They are never sold upon hats.
Your reasoning is certainly plausible.
They all appear to be adhesive, and there is a distinct odour of lime cream.
But his wife you said that she had ceased to love him.
This hat has not been brushed for weeks.
But he might be a bachelor.
Nay, he was bringing home the goose as a peace offering to his wife.
Remember the card upon the bird’s leg.
You have an answer to everything.
Anyhow, he never got tallow stains from a gas jet.
Has it returned to life and flapped off through the kitchen window?
See what my wife found in its crop!
Sherlock holmes sat up with a whistle.
Said he, this is treasure trove indeed.
I suppose you know what you have got?
It’s more than a precious stone.
It is the precious stone.
Not the countess of morcar’s blue carbuncle!
It was lost, if i remember aright, at the hotel cosmopolitan, i remarked.
John horner, a plumber, was accused of having abstracted it from the lady’s jewel case.
I have some account of the matter here, i believe.
He had remained with horner some little time, but had finally been called away.
So much for the police court, said holmes thoughtfully, tossing aside the paper.
If this fail, i shall have recourse to other methods.
Give me a pencil and that slip of paper.
But will he see it?
Ah, yes, i shall keep the stone.
It’s a bonny thing, said he.
Just see how it glints and sparkles.
Of course it is a nucleus and focus of crime.
They are the devil’s pet baits.
In the larger and older jewels every facet may stand for a bloody deed.
This stone is not yet twenty years old.
In spite of its youth, it has already a sinister history.
Do you think that this man horner is innocent?
And you can do nothing until then?
In that case i shall continue my professional round.
Very glad to see you.
There is a woodcock, i believe.
Pray take this chair by the fire, mr. baker.
Ah, watson, you have just come at the right time.
Is that your hat, mr. baker?
Yes, sir, that is undoubtedly my hat.
I am at a loss to know now why you did not advertise.
Our visitor gave a rather shamefaced laugh.
Shillings have not been so plentiful with me as they once were, he remarked.
I did not care to spend more money in a hopeless attempt at recovering them.
By the way, about the bird, we were compelled to eat it.
Our visitor half rose from his chair in his excitement.
Yes, it would have been of no use to anyone had we not done so.
Oh, certainly, certainly, answered mr. baker with a sigh of relief.
Sherlock holmes glanced sharply across at me with a slight shrug of his shoulders.
There is your hat, then, and there your bird, said he.
My pence were duly paid, and the rest is familiar to you.
It is quite certain that he knows nothing whatever about the matter.
Your beer should be excellent if it is as good as your geese, said he.
But you see, sir, them’s not our geese.
Well, i got the two dozen from a salesman in covent garden.
I know some of them.
Well, here’s your good health landlord, and prosperity to your house.
Let us follow it out to the bitter end.
Faces to the south, then, and quick march!
It’s a cold night, said holmes.
The salesman nodded and shot a questioning glance at my companion.
Sold out of geese, i see, continued holmes, pointing at the bare slabs of marble.
Let you have five hundred to morrow morning.
Well, there are some on the stall with the gas flare.
Ah, but i was recommended to you.
The landlord of the alpha.
Oh, yes i sent him a couple of dozen.
Fine birds they were, too.
Now where did you get them from?
To my surprise the question provoked a burst of anger from the salesman.
Let’s have it straight, now.
Well then, i shan’t tell you.
You’d be as warm, maybe, if you were as pestered as i am.
If you won’t tell us the bet is off, that is all.
Well, then, you’ve lost your fiver, for it’s town bred, snapped the salesman.
It’s nothing of the kind.
I tell you, all those birds that went to the alpha were town bred.
You’ll never persuade me to believe that.
It’s merely taking your money, for i know that i am right.
Bring me the books, bill, said he.
You see this little book?
That’s the list of the folk from whom i buy.
You see this other page in red ink?
Well, that is a list of my town suppliers.
Now, look at that third name.
Just read it out to me.
Now turn that up in the ledger.
Holmes turned to the page indicated.
Sherlock holmes looked deeply chagrined.
I’ve had enough of you and your geese, he shouted.
I wish you were all at the devil together.
Did i buy the geese off you?
No but one of them was mine all the same, whined the little man.
Well, then, ask mrs. oakshott for it.
She told me to ask you.
Well, you can ask the king of proosia, for all i care.
I’ve had enough of it.
He rushed fiercely forward, and the inquirer flitted away into the darkness.
This may save us a visit to brixton road, whispered holmes.
Come with me, and we will see what is to be made of this fellow.
He asked in a quavering voice.
I think that i could be of assistance to you.
How could you know anything of the matter?
My name is sherlock holmes.
It is my business to know what other people don’t know.
But you can know nothing of this?
Excuse me, i know everything of it.
I can hardly explain to you how interested i am in this matter.
Sherlock holmes hailed a four wheeler which was passing.
The man hesitated for an instant.
My name is john robinson, he answered with a sidelong glance.
No, no the real name, said holmes sweetly.
It is always awkward doing business with an alias.
A flush sprang to the white cheeks of the stranger.
Well then, said he, my real name is james ryder.
Head attendant at the hotel cosmopolitan.
Said holmes cheerily as we filed into the room.
The fire looks very seasonable in this weather.
You look cold, mr. ryder.
Pray take the basket chair.
I will just put on my slippers before we settle this little matter of yours.
You want to know what became of those geese?
Or rather, i fancy, of that goose.
Oh, sir, he cried, can you tell me where it went to?
Yes, and a most remarkable bird it proved.
I don’t wonder that you should take an interest in it.
I have it here in my museum.
Our visitor staggered to his feet and clutched the mantelpiece with his right hand.
Ryder stood glaring with a drawn face, uncertain whether to claim or to disown it.
The game’s up, ryder, said holmes quietly.
Hold up, man, or you’ll be into the fire!
Give him an arm back into his chair, watson.
He’s not got blood enough to go in for felony with impunity.
Give him a dash of brandy.
Now he looks a little more human.
What a shrimp it is, to be sure!
Still, that little may as well be cleared up to make the case complete.
You had heard, ryder, of this blue stone of the countess of morcar’s?
It was catherine cusack who told me of it, said he in a crackling voice.
I see her ladyship’s waiting maid.
What did you do, then?
For god’s sake, have mercy!
It would break their hearts.
I never went wrong before!
I’ll swear it on a bible.
Oh, don’t bring it into court!
Get back into your chair!
I will fly, mr. holmes.
I will leave the country, sir.
Then the charge against him will break down.
We will talk about that.
And now let us hear a true account of the next act.
Tell us the truth, for there lies your only hope of safety.
Ryder passed his tongue over his parched lips.
I will tell you it just as it happened, sir, said he.
There was no place about the hotel where it would be safe.
I went out, as if on some commission, and i made for my sister’s house.
He would show me how to turn the stone into money.
But how to get to him in safety?
I thought of the agonies i had gone through in coming from the hotel.
Whatever were you doing with that bird, jem?’ says she.
It’s the big white one over yonder.
He laughed until he choked, and we got a knife and opened the goose.
I left the bird, rushed back to my sister’s, and hurried into the back yard.
There was not a bird to be seen there.
Where are they all, maggie?’ i cried.
You heard him yourselves to night.
Well, he has always answered me like that.
My sister thinks that i am going mad.
Sometimes i think that i am myself.
He burst into convulsive sobbing, with his face buried in his hands.
Then my friend rose and threw open the door.
And no more words were needed.
This fellow will not go wrong again he is too terribly frightened.
Send him to gaol now, and you make him a gaol bird for life.
Besides, it is the season of forgiveness.
Mrs. hudson has been knocked up, she retorted upon me, and i on you.
What is it, then a fire?
She is waiting now in the sitting room.
I thought, at any rate, that i should call you and give you the chance.
My dear fellow, i would not miss it for anything.
Good morning, madam, said holmes cheerily.
It is fear, mr. holmes.
Sherlock holmes ran her over with one of his quick, all comprehensive glances.
You must not fear, said he soothingly, bending forward and patting her forearm.
We shall soon set matters right, i have no doubt.
You have come in by train this morning, i see.
The lady gave a violent start and stared in bewilderment at my companion.
There is no mystery, my dear madam, said he, smiling.
The marks are perfectly fresh.
Whatever your reasons may be, you are perfectly correct, said she.
Sir, i can stand this strain no longer i shall go mad if it continues.
It was from her that i had your address.
Ah yes, i recall the case it was concerned with an opal tiara.
I think it was before your time, watson.
You may advise me how to walk amid the dangers which encompass me.
I am all attention, madam.
The name is familiar to me, said he.
But a terrible change came over our stepfather about this time.
Your sister is dead, then?
Pray be precise as to details, said he.
There is no communication between them, but they all open out into the same corridor.
Do i make myself plain?
The windows of the three rooms open out upon the lawn.
I am a light sleeper, and it has awakened me.
It must be those wretched gipsies in the plantation.’ very likely.
Was it your custom always to lock yourselves in at night?
We had no feeling of security unless our doors were locked.
Pray proceed with your statement.
I could not sleep that night.
A vague feeling of impending misfortune impressed me.
It was a wild night.
The wind was howling outside, and the rain was beating and splashing against the windows.
I knew that it was my sister’s voice.
I sprang from my bed, wrapped a shawl round me, and rushed into the corridor.
I stared at it horror stricken, not knowing what was about to issue from it.
She writhed as one who is in terrible pain, and her limbs were dreadfully convulsed.
Such was the dreadful end of my beloved sister.
One moment, said holmes, are you sure about this whistle and metallic sound?
Could you swear to it?
That was what the county coroner asked me at the inquiry.
No, she was in her night dress.
And what conclusions did the coroner come to?
The chimney is wide, but is barred up by four large staples.
It is certain, therefore, that my sister was quite alone when she met her end.
Besides, there were no marks of any violence upon her.
The doctors examined her for it, but without success.
What do you think that this unfortunate lady died of, then?
Were there gipsies in the plantation at the time?
Yes, there are nearly always some there.
Ah, and what did you gather from this allusion to a band a speckled band?
Holmes shook his head like a man who is far from being satisfied.
These are very deep waters, said he pray go on with your narrative.
You have done wisely, said my friend.
But have you told me all?
Miss roylott, you have not.
You are screening your stepfather.
Why, what do you mean?
You have been cruelly used, said holmes.
The lady coloured deeply and covered over her injured wrist.
He is a hard man, she said, and perhaps he hardly knows his own strength.
This is a very deep business, he said at last.
You are not averse to this trip, watson?
Then we shall both come.
What are you going to do yourself?
And you may expect us early in the afternoon.
I have myself some small business matters to attend to.
Will you not wait and breakfast?
My heart is lightened already since i have confided my trouble to you.
I shall look forward to seeing you again this afternoon.
She dropped her thick black veil over her face and glided from the room.
And what do you think of it all, watson?
Asked sherlock holmes, leaning back in his chair.
It seems to me to be a most dark and sinister business.
Dark enough and sinister enough.
But what, then, did the gipsies do?
I see many objections to any such theory.
It is precisely for that reason that we are going to stoke moran this day.
But what in the name of the devil!
Which of you is holmes?
My name, sir but you have the advantage of me, said my companion quietly.
I am dr. grimesby roylott, of stoke moran.
Indeed, doctor, said holmes blandly.
I will do nothing of the kind.
My stepdaughter has been here.
What has she been saying to you?
It is a little cold for the time of the year, said holmes.
Screamed the old man furiously.
But i have heard that the crocuses promise well, continued my companion imperturbably.
You put me off, do you?
Said our new visitor, taking a step forward and shaking his hunting crop.
I know you, you scoundrel!
I have heard of you before.
You are holmes, the meddler.
Holmes, the scotland yard jack in office!
Your conversation is most entertaining, said he.
When you go out close the door, for there is a decided draught.
I will go when i have had my say.
Don’t you dare to meddle with my affairs.
I know that miss stoner has been here.
I am a dangerous man to fall foul of!
He seems a very amiable person, said holmes, laughing.
Fancy his having the insolence to confound me with the official detective force!
It was nearly one o’clock when sherlock holmes returned from his excursion.
I have seen the will of the deceased wife, said he.
I should be very much obliged if you would slip your revolver into your pocket.
That and a tooth brush are, i think, all that we need.
Suddenly, however, he started, tapped me on the shoulder, and pointed over the meadows.
Yes, sir, that be the house of dr. grimesby roylott, remarked the driver.
There is some building going on there, said holmes that is where we are going.
There it is, where the lady is walking.
And the lady, i fancy, is miss stoner, observed holmes, shading his eyes.
Yes, i think we had better do as you suggest.
It may stop his gossip.
You see that we have been as good as our word.
I have been waiting so eagerly for you, she cried, shaking hands with us warmly.
All has turned out splendidly.
Miss stoner turned white to the lips as she listened.
She cried, he has followed me, then.
He is so cunning that i never know when i am safe from him.
What will he say when he returns?
You must lock yourself up from him to night.
If he is violent, we shall take you away to your aunt’s at harrow.
But i am now sleeping in the middle one.
Pending the alterations, as i understand.
I believe that it was an excuse to move me from my room.
There are windows in it, of course?
Yes, but very small ones.
Too narrow for anyone to pass through.
As you both locked your doors at night, your rooms were unapproachable from that side.
Now, would you have the kindness to go into your room and bar your shutters?
There was no slit through which a knife could be passed to raise the bar.
Said he, scratching his chin in some perplexity, my theory certainly presents some difficulties.
No one could pass these shutters if they were bolted.
Well, we shall see if the inside throws any light upon the matter.
A small side door led into the whitewashed corridor from which the three bedrooms opened.
Where does that bell communicate with?
It goes to the housekeeper’s room.
It looks newer than the other things?
Yes, it was only put there a couple of years ago.
Your sister asked for it, i suppose?
No, i never heard of her using it.
We used always to get what we wanted for ourselves.
Indeed, it seemed unnecessary to put so nice a bell pull there.
Then he did the same with the wood work with which the chamber was panelled.
Finally he took the bell rope in his hand and gave it a brisk tug.
Why, it’s a dummy, said he.
No, it is not even attached to a wire.
I never noticed that before.
Muttered holmes, pulling at the rope.
There are one or two very singular points about this room.
That is also quite modern, said the lady.
Done about the same time as the bell rope?
Yes, there were several little changes carried out about that time.
With your permission, miss stoner, we shall now carry our researches into the inner apartment.
Holmes walked slowly round and examined each and all of them with the keenest interest.
He asked, tapping the safe.
You have seen inside, then?
Only once, some years ago.
I remember that it was full of papers.
There isn’t a cat in it, for example?
He took up a small saucer of milk which stood on the top of it.
No we don’t keep a cat.
But there is a cheetah and a baboon.
There is one point which i should wish to determine.
That is quite settled, said he, rising and putting his lens in his pocket.
What do you make of that, watson?
It’s a common enough lash.
But i don’t know why it should be tied.
That is not quite so common, is it?
I shall most certainly do so.
The matter is too serious for any hesitation.
Your life may depend upon your compliance.
I assure you that i am in your hands.
Both miss stoner and i gazed at him in astonishment.
Yes, it must be so.
I believe that that is the village inn over there?
Yes, that is the crown.
Your windows would be visible from there?
The rest you will leave in our hands.
But what will you do?
Then, for pity’s sake, tell me what was the cause of my sister’s death.
I should prefer to have clearer proofs before i speak.
No, i do not think so.
I think that there was probably some more tangible cause.
There is a distinct element of danger.
Can i be of assistance?
Your presence might be invaluable.
Then i shall certainly come.
It is very kind of you.
You have evidently seen more in these rooms than was visible to me.
No, but i fancy that i may have deduced a little more.
I imagine that you saw all that i did.
You saw the ventilator, too?
It was so small that a rat could hardly pass through.
I knew that we should find a ventilator before ever we came to stoke moran.
You remember in her statement she said that her sister could smell dr. roylott’s cigar.
But what harm can there be in that?
Well, there is at least a curious coincidence of dates.
Does not that strike you?
I cannot as yet see any connection.
Did you observe anything very peculiar about that bed?
It was clamped to the floor.
Did you ever see a bed fastened like that before?
I cannot say that i have.
The lady could not move her bed.
Holmes, i cried, i seem to see dimly what you are hinting at.
We are only just in time to prevent some subtle and horrible crime.
Subtle enough and horrible enough.
When a doctor does go wrong he is the first of criminals.
He has nerve and he has knowledge.
Palmer and pritchard were among the heads of their profession.
I whispered did you see it?
Holmes was for the moment as startled as i.
His hand closed like a vice upon my wrist in his agitation.
Then he broke into a low laugh and put his lips to my ear.
It is a nice household, he murmured.
I had forgotten the strange pets which the doctor affected.
All was as we had seen it in the daytime.
I nodded to show that i had heard.
We must sit without light.
He would see it through the ventilator.
Do not go asleep your very life may depend upon it.
Have your pistol ready in case we should need it.
I will sit on the side of the bed, and you in that chair.
I took out my revolver and laid it on the corner of the table.
By it he laid the box of matches and the stump of a candle.
Then he turned down the lamp, and we were left in darkness.
How shall i ever forget that dreadful vigil?
The shutters cut off the least ray of light, and we waited in absolute darkness.
How long they seemed, those quarters!
Someone in the next room had lit a dark lantern.
For half an hour i sat with straining ears.
It means that it is all over, holmes answered.
And perhaps, after all, it is for the best.
Take your pistol, and we will enter dr. roylott’s room.
With a grave face he lit the lamp and led the way down the corridor.
Twice he struck at the chamber door without any reply from within.
It was a singular sight which met our eyes.
As we entered he made neither sound nor motion.
I took a step forward.
It is a swamp adder!
Cried holmes the deadliest snake in india.
He has died within ten seconds of being bitten.
Such are the true facts of the death of dr. grimesby roylott, of stoke moran.
Then i thought of the whistle.
I had come to these conclusions before ever i had entered his room.
With the result of driving it through the ventilator.
I’ve got him here, he whispered, jerking his thumb over his shoulder he’s all right.
It’s a new patient, he whispered.
I thought i’d bring him round myself then he couldn’t slip away.
There he is, all safe and sound.
I must go now, doctor i have my dooties, just the same as you.
And off he went, this trusty tout, without even giving me time to thank him.
I entered my consulting room and found a gentleman seated by the table.
I took it up and glanced at it.
That was the name, style, and abode of my morning visitor.
Oh, my night could not be called monotonous, said he, and laughed.
All my medical instincts rose up against that laugh.
I cried pull yourself together!
And i poured out some water from a caraffe.
Presently he came to himself once more, very weary and pale looking.
I have been making a fool of myself, he gasped.
He unwound the handkerchief and held out his hand.
It gave even my hardened nerves a shudder to look at it.
It had been hacked or torn right out from the roots.
I cried, this is a terrible injury.
It must have bled considerably.
You should have been a surgeon.
It is a question of hydraulics, you see, and came within my own province.
A thing like a cleaver, said he.
He lay back without wincing, though he bit his lip from time to time.
I asked when i had finished.
Between your brandy and your bandage, i feel a new man.
I was very weak, but i have had a good deal to go through.
Perhaps you had better not speak of the matter.
It is evidently trying to your nerves.
Would you give me an introduction to him?
I’ll take you round to him myself.
I should be immensely obliged to you.
We’ll call a cab and go together.
We shall just be in time to have a little breakfast with him.
Do you feel equal to it?
Yes i shall not feel easy until i have told my story.
Pray, lie down there and make yourself absolutely at home.
I suppose that everyone finds his first independent start in business a dreary experience.
To me it has been exceptionally so.
I do not think that i have ever seen so thin a man.
Mr. hatherley?’ said he, with something of a german accent.
But you will find that all i say is really to the point.
Do you promise, then?’ said he at last.
Yes, i promise.’ absolute and complete silence before, during, and after?
The passage outside was empty.
That’s all right,’ said he, coming back.
I know that clerks are sometimes curious as to their master’s affairs.
Even my dread of losing a client could not restrain me from showing my impatience.
How would fifty guineas for a night’s work suit you?’ he asked.
Most admirably.’ i say a night’s work, but an hour’s would be nearer the mark.
If you show us what is wrong we shall soon set it right ourselves.
I suppose there would be no chance of a train back.
I suppose that we are absolutely safe from eavesdroppers?’ entirely.’ then the matter stands thus.
I hope that i make it all plain?’ i quite follow you,’ said i.
But that is a mere detail.
At reading i had to change not only my carriage but my station.
Did you observe the colour?
Yes, i saw it by the side lights when i was stepping into the carriage.
I am sorry to have interrupted you.
Pray continue your most interesting statement.
Away we went then, and we drove for at least an hour.
Colonel stark laid down the lamp on the top of a harmonium beside the door.
I shall not keep you waiting an instant,’ said he, and vanished into the darkness.
It was a wonderfully silent house.
A vague feeling of uneasiness began to steal over me.
And where was the place?
Yet it was quite certain, from the absolute stillness, that we were in the country.
I should not stay here.
Was it all to go for nothing?
This woman might, for all i knew, be a monomaniac.
This is my secretary and manager,’ said the colonel.
Perhaps we had better proceed to business, then,’ said he.
This is only where we compress it.
Colonel lysander stark stopped at last before a low door, which he unlocked.
Ferguson remained outside, and the colonel ushered me in.
It was indeed a gigantic one, and capable of exercising enormous pressure.
What are you doing there?’ he asked.
His face set hard, and a baleful light sprang up in his grey eyes.
It was the clank of the levers and the swish of the leaking cylinder.
He had set the engine at work.
I threw myself, screaming, against the door, and dragged with my nails at the lock.
The next instant i threw myself through, and lay half fainting upon the other side.
It was the same good friend whose warning i had so foolishly rejected.
They will be here in a moment.
They will see that you are not there.
My guide stopped and looked about her like one who is at her wit’s end.
It is your only chance,’ said she.
I rushed across the bedroom, flung open the window, and looked out.
Fritz!’ she cried in english, remember your promise after the last time.
You said it should not be again.
You will be the ruin of us.
He has seen too much.
Suddenly, however, as i ran, a deadly dizziness and sickness came over me.
How long i remained unconscious i cannot tell.
Half dazed, i went into the station and asked about the morning train.
There would be one to reading in less than an hour.
The same porter was on duty, i found, as had been there when i arrived.
I inquired of him whether he had ever heard of colonel lysander stark.
The name was strange to him.
Had he observed a carriage the night before waiting for me?
Was there a police station anywhere near?
There was one about three miles off.
It was too far for me to go, weak and ill as i was.
I put the case into your hands and shall do exactly what you advise.
We both sat in silence for some little time after listening to this extraordinary narrative.
Here is an advertisement which will interest you, said he.
It appeared in all the papers about a year ago.
Left his lodgings at ten o’clock at night, and has not been heard of since.
Was dressed in,’ etc., etc.
Then that explains what the girl said.
There you are, said he.
That circle is drawn at a radius of ten miles from the village.
The place we want must be somewhere near that line.
You said ten miles, i think, sir.
It was an hour’s good drive.
And you think that they brought you back all that way when you were unconscious?
They must have done so.
I have a confused memory, too, of having been lifted and conveyed somewhere.
Perhaps the villain was softened by the woman’s entreaties.
I hardly think that likely.
I never saw a more inexorable face in my life.
Oh, we shall soon clear up all that, said bradstreet.
I think i could lay my finger on it, said holmes quietly.
Cried the inspector, you have formed your opinion!
Come, now, we shall see who agrees with you.
I say it is south, for the country is more deserted there.
And i say east, said my patient.
I am for west, remarked the plain clothes man.
There are several quiet little villages up there.
Come, cried the inspector, laughing it’s a very pretty diversity of opinion.
We have boxed the compass among us.
Who do you give your casting vote to?
But we can’t all be.
He placed his finger in the centre of the circle.
This is where we shall find them.
But the twelve mile drive?
Six out and six back.
You say yourself that the horse was fresh and glossy when you got in.
How could it be that if it had gone twelve miles over heavy roads?
Indeed, it is a likely ruse enough, observed bradstreet thoughtfully.
Of course there can be no doubt as to the nature of this gang.
None at all, said holmes.
They have been turning out half crowns by the thousand.
Asked bradstreet as the train steamed off again on its way.
When did it break out?
The station master laughed heartily.
Cried hatherley, in intense excitement.
There is the gravel drive, and there are the rose bushes where i lay.
That second window is the one that i jumped from.
Well, at least, said holmes, you have had your revenge upon them.
Here is a very fashionable epistle, i remarked as he entered.
He broke the seal and glanced over the contents.
Oh, come, it may prove to be something of interest, after all.
And from a noble client?
One of the highest in england.
My dear fellow, i congratulate you.
You have been reading the papers diligently of late, have you not?
It looks like it, said i ruefully, pointing to a huge bundle in the corner.
I have had nothing else to do.
It is fortunate, for you will perhaps be able to post me up.
I read nothing except the criminal news and the agony column.
The latter is always instructive.
Oh, yes, with the deepest interest.
The letter which i hold in my hand is from lord st. simon.
He will be here in an hour.
Then i have just time, with your assistance, to get clear upon the subject.
Here he is, said he, sitting down and flattening it out upon his knee.
Lord robert walsingham de vere st. simon, second son of the duke of balmoral.’ hum!
Arms azure, three caltrops in chief over a fess sable.
Was under secretary for the colonies in a late administration.
The duke, his father, was at one time secretary for foreign affairs.
They inherit plantagenet blood by direct descent, and tudor on the distaff side.
Well, there is nothing very instructive in all this.
I think that i must turn to you watson, for something more solid.
Oh, you mean the little problem of the grosvenor square furniture van.
That is quite cleared up now though, indeed, it was obvious from the first.
Pray give me the results of your newspaper selections.
Here is the first notice which i can find.
Esq., of san francisco, cal., u.s.a.’ that is all.
Terse and to the point, remarked holmes, stretching his long, thin legs towards the fire.
Those are all the notices which appeared before the disappearance of the bride.
Asked holmes with a start.
The vanishing of the lady.
When did she vanish, then?
This is more interesting than it promised to be quite dramatic, in fact.
Yes it struck me as being a little out of the common.
Pray let me have the details.
I warn you that they are very incomplete.
Perhaps we may make them less so.
And an exceedingly interesting case it appears to be.
I would not have missed it for worlds.
Lord robert st. simon, announced our page boy, throwing open the door.
Good day, lord st. simon, said holmes, rising and bowing.
This is my friend and colleague, dr. watson.
Draw up a little to the fire, and we will talk this matter over.
A most painful matter to me, as you can most readily imagine, mr. holmes.
I have been cut to the quick.
My last client of the sort was a king.
Had he lost his wife?
I’m sure i beg pardon.
I have already learned all that is in the public prints, nothing more.
Lord st. simon glanced over it.
Yes, it is correct, as far as it goes.
But it needs a great deal of supplementing before anyone could offer an opinion.
I think that i may arrive at my facts most directly by questioning you.
When did you first meet miss hatty doran?
In san francisco, a year ago.
You were travelling in the states?
Did you become engaged then?
But you were on a friendly footing?
I was amused by her society, and she could see that i was amused.
Her father is very rich?
He is said to be the richest man on the pacific slope.
And how did he make his money?
He had nothing a few years ago.
Then he struck gold, invested it, and came up by leaps and bounds.
Now, what is your own impression as to the young lady’s your wife’s character?
The nobleman swung his glasses a little faster and stared down into the fire.
She is impetuous volcanic, i was about to say.
She is swift in making up her mind and fearless in carrying out her resolutions.
I brought this with me.
He opened a locket and showed us the full face of a very lovely woman.
Holmes gazed long and earnestly at it.
Then he closed the locket and handed it back to lord st. simon.
The young lady came to london, then, and you renewed your acquaintance?
Yes, her father brought her over for this last london season.
I met her several times, became engaged to her, and have now married her.
She brought, i understand, a considerable dowry?
Not more than is usual in my family.
And this, of course, remains to you, since the marriage is a fait accompli ?
I really have made no inquiries on the subject.
Did you see miss doran on the day before the wedding?
Was she in good spirits?
She kept talking of what we should do in our future lives.
And on the morning of the wedding?
She was as bright as possible at least until after the ceremony.
And did you observe any change in her then?
Pray let us have it, for all that.
She dropped her bouquet as we went towards the vestry.
You say that there was a gentleman in the pew.
Some of the general public were present, then?
It is impossible to exclude them when the church is open.
This gentleman was not one of your wife’s friends?
I hardly noticed his appearance.
But really i think that we are wandering rather far from the point.
What did she do on re entering her father’s house?
I saw her in conversation with her maid.
And who is her maid?
She is an american and came from california with her.
A little too much so.
It seemed to me that her mistress allowed her to take great liberties.
Still, of course, in america they look upon these things in a different way.
How long did she speak to this alice?
I had something else to think of.
You did not overhear what they said?
I have no idea what she meant.
American slang is very expressive sometimes.
And what did your wife do when she finished speaking to her maid?
She walked into the breakfast room.
She was very independent in little matters like that.
Lord st. simon shrugged his shoulders and raised his eyebrows.
She used to be at the allegro.
Flora was a dear little thing, but exceedingly hot headed and devotedly attached to me.
She was quiet when she saw that there was no good in making a row.
Did your wife hear all this?
No, thank goodness, she did not.
And she was seen walking with this very woman afterwards?
That is what mr. lestrade, of scotland yard, looks upon as so serious.
Well, it is a possible supposition.
I did not say a probable one.
But you do not yourself look upon this as likely?
I do not think flora would hurt a fly.
Still, jealousy is a strange transformer of characters.
Pray what is your own theory as to what took place?
Well, really, i came to seek a theory, not to propound one.
I have given you all the facts.
In short, that she had become suddenly deranged?
Well, certainly that is also a conceivable hypothesis, said holmes, smiling.
And now, lord st. simon, i think that i have nearly all my data.
We could see the other side of the road and the park.
Then i do not think that i need to detain you longer.
I shall communicate with you.
Should you be fortunate enough to solve this problem, said our client, rising.
I say that i have solved it.
Where, then, is my wife?
That is a detail which i shall speedily supply.
Lord st. simon shook his head.
My whole examination served to turn my conjecture into a certainty.
But i have heard all that you have heard.
Without, however, the knowledge of pre existing cases which serves me so well.
It is one of these cases but, hullo, here is lestrade!
Asked holmes with a twinkle in his eye.
It is this infernal st. simon marriage case.
I can make neither head nor tail of the business.
Who ever heard of such a mixed affair?
Every clue seems to slip through my fingers.
I have been at work upon it all day.
Yes, i have been dragging the serpentine.
In heaven’s name, what for?
In search of the body of lady st. simon.
Sherlock holmes leaned back in his chair and laughed heartily.
Have you dragged the basin of trafalgar square fountain?
Lestrade shot an angry glance at my companion.
I suppose you know all about it, he snarled.
Well, i have only just heard the facts, but my mind is made up.
Then you think that the serpentine plays no part in the matter?
I think it very unlikely.
Then perhaps you will kindly explain how it is that we found this in it?
There, said he, putting a new wedding ring upon the top of the pile.
There is a little nut for you to crack, master holmes.
Said my friend, blowing blue rings into the air.
You dragged them from the serpentine?
They were found floating near the margin by a park keeper.
And pray what did you hope to arrive at through this?
At some evidence implicating flora millar in the disappearance.
I am afraid that you will find it difficult.
Cried lestrade with some bitterness.
You have made two blunders in as many minutes.
This dress does implicate miss flora millar.
In the dress is a pocket.
In the pocket is a card case.
In the card case is a note.
And here is the very note.
He slapped it down upon the table in front of him.
Listen to this you will see me when all is ready.
Very good, lestrade, said holmes, laughing.
You really are very fine indeed.
This is indeed important, said he.
Lestrade rose in his triumph and bent his head to look.
Why, he shrieked, you’re looking at the wrong side!
On the contrary, this is the right side.
Here is the note written in pencil over here.
I looked at it before, said lestrade.
It is most important, all the same.
I’ve wasted time enough, said lestrade, rising.
I believe in hard work and not in sitting by the fire spinning fine theories.
He gathered up the garments, thrust them into the bag, and made for the door.
Lady st. simon is a myth.
There is not, and there never has been, any such person.
Lestrade looked sadly at my companion.
Just before nine o’clock sherlock holmes stepped briskly into the room.
They have laid the supper, then, he said, rubbing his hands.
You seem to expect company.
They have laid for five.
Yes, i fancy we may have some company dropping in, said he.
I am surprised that lord st. simon has not already arrived.
I fancy that i hear his step now upon the stairs.
My messenger reached you, then?
Yes, and i confess that the contents startled me beyond measure.
Have you good authority for what you say?
Lord st. simon sank into a chair and passed his hand over his forehead.
It is the purest accident.
I cannot allow that there is any humiliation.
Ah, you look on these things from another standpoint.
I fail to see that anyone is to blame.
Having no mother, she had no one to advise her at such a crisis.
You must make allowance for this poor girl, placed in so unprecedented a position.
I will make no allowance.
I am very angry indeed, and i have been shamefully used.
I think that i heard a ring, said holmes.
Yes, there are steps on the landing.
He opened the door and ushered in a lady and gentleman.
The lady, i think, you have already met.
You’re angry, robert, said she.
Well, i guess you have every cause to be.
Pray make no apology to me, said lord st. simon bitterly.
Then i’ll tell our story right away, said the lady.
I fainted dead away, and i was very sick for months after.
Pa thought i had a decline and took me to half the doctors in ’frisco.
We can’t command our love, but we can our actions.
I wonder i didn’t drop.
I didn’t know what to do.
Should i stop the service and make a scene in the church?
I just made up my mind to run away and explain afterwards.
He beckoned to me and then began walking into the park.
I slipped out, put on my things, and followed him.
I saw it in a paper, explained the american.
It gave the name and the church but not where the lady lived.
Then you won’t forgive me?
You won’t shake hands before i go?
Oh, certainly, if it would give you any pleasure.
He put out his hand and coldly grasped that which she extended to him.
I had hoped, suggested holmes, that you would have joined us in a friendly supper.
I think that there you ask a little too much, responded his lordship.
He included us all in a sweeping bow and stalked out of the room.
You were not yourself at fault at all, then?
Obviously something had occurred during the morning, then, to cause her to change her mind.
What could that something be?
Had she seen someone, then?
It might be a lover it might be a husband.
Her young womanhood had, i knew, been spent in rough scenes and under strange conditions.
So far i had got before i ever heard lord st. simon’s narrative.
And how in the world did you find them?
How did you deduce the select?
There are not many in london which charge at that rate.
But with no very good result, i remarked.
His conduct was certainly not very gracious.
It seems rather sad that his relatives should allow him to come out alone.
What on earth can be the matter with him?
He is looking up at the numbers of the houses.
I believe that he is coming here, said holmes, rubbing his hands.
Yes i rather think he is coming to consult me professionally.
I think that i recognise the symptoms.
Did i not tell you?
You have come to me to tell your story, have you not?
You are fatigued with your haste.
No doubt you think me mad?
I see that you have had some great trouble, responded holmes.
Besides, it is not i alone.
My name, answered our visitor, is probably familiar to your ears.
I am alexander holder, of the banking firm of holder stevenson, of threadneedle street.
We waited, all curiosity, until with another effort he braced himself to tell his story.
You doubt its value?’ he asked.
I only doubt ’ the propriety of my leaving it.
You may set your mind at rest about that.
It is a pure matter of form.
I already regretted having ever consented to take charge of it.
Bankers’ safes had been forced before now, and why should not mine be?
If so, how terrible would be the position in which i should find myself!
She came with an excellent character, however, and has always given me satisfaction.
So much for the servants.
I am a widower and have an only son, arthur.
He has been a disappointment to me, mr. holmes a grievous disappointment.
I have no doubt that i am myself to blame.
People tell me that i have spoiled him.
When my dear wife died i felt that he was all i had to love.
I have never denied him a wish.
And now there is only she to be described.
She is my right hand.
I do not know what i could do without her.
In only one matter has she ever gone against my wishes.
It is too late forever too late!
Where have you put it?’ asked arthur.
It is locked up,’ i answered.
Oh, any old key will fit that bureau.
He followed me to my room, however, that night with a very grave face.
Yes, but you would not have me leave it a dishonoured man,’ said he.
I could not bear the disgrace.
On the contrary, your statement is singularly lucid.
About two in the morning, then, i was awakened by some sound in the house.
I lay listening with all my ears.
Arthur!’ i screamed, you villain!
He appeared to be wrenching at it, or bending it with all his strength.
At my cry he dropped it from his grasp and turned as pale as death.
I snatched it up and examined it.
One of the gold corners, with three of the beryls in it, was missing.
You blackguard!’ i shouted, beside myself with rage.
You have dishonoured me forever!
Where are the jewels which you have stolen?’ stolen!’ he cried.
Yes, thief!’ i roared, shaking him by the shoulder.
There cannot be any missing,’ said he.
And you know where they are.
Must i call you a liar as well as a thief?
I was determined that the law should have its way in everything.
At least,’ said he, you will not have me arrested at once.
I saw that he was too hardened for any words of mine to influence him.
There was but one way for it.
I called in the inspector and gave him into custody.
The police have openly confessed that they can at present make nothing of it.
You may go to any expense which you think necessary.
My god, what shall i do!
I have lost my honour, my gems, and my son in one night.
Oh, what shall i do!
Do you receive much company?
None save my partner with his family and an occasional friend of arthur’s.
Sir george burnwell has been several times lately.
No one else, i think.
Do you go out much in society?
Mary and i stay at home.
We neither of us care for it.
That is unusual in a young girl.
She is of a quiet nature.
Besides, she is not so very young.
She is four and twenty.
This matter, from what you say, seems to have been a shock to her also.
She is even more affected than i.
You have neither of you any doubt as to your son’s guilt?
I hardly consider that a conclusive proof.
Was the remainder of the coronet at all injured?
Do you not think, then, that he might have been trying to straighten it?
You are doing what you can for him and for me.
But it is too heavy a task.
What was he doing there at all?
If his purpose were innocent, why did he not say so?
And if it were guilty, why did he not invent a lie?
His silence appears to me to cut both ways.
There are several singular points about the case.
What did the police think of the noise which awoke you from your sleep?
They considered that it might be caused by arthur’s closing his bedroom door.
What did they say, then, of the disappearance of these gems?
Have they thought of looking outside the house?
Yes, they have shown extraordinary energy.
The whole garden has already been minutely examined.
It appeared to you to be a simple case to me it seems exceedingly complex.
Consider what is involved by your theory.
I ask you now, is such a theory tenable?
But what other is there?
Cried the banker with a gesture of despair.
If his motives were innocent, why does he not explain them?
Her lips, too, were bloodless, but her eyes were flushed with crying.
You have given orders that arthur should be liberated, have you not, dad?
No, no, my girl, the matter must be probed to the bottom.
But i am so sure that he is innocent.
You know what woman’s instincts are.
Why is he silent, then, if he is innocent?
Perhaps because he was so angry that you should suspect him.
Oh, but he had only picked it up to look at it.
Oh, do, do take my word for it that he is innocent.
Let the matter drop and say no more.
It is so dreadful to think of our dear arthur in prison!
I shall never let it drop until the gems are found never, mary!
Your affection for arthur blinds you as to the awful consequences to me.
She asked, facing round to me.
He wished us to leave him alone.
He is round in the stable lane now.
She raised her dark eyebrows.
What can he hope to find there?
This, i suppose, is he.
I believe i have the honour of addressing miss mary holder.
Might i ask you a question or two?
Pray do, sir, if it may help to clear this horrible affair up.
You heard nothing yourself last night?
Nothing, until my uncle here began to speak loudly.
I heard that, and i came down.
You shut up the windows and doors the night before.
Did you fasten all the windows?
Were they all fastened this morning?
You have a maid who has a sweetheart?
Wait a little, mr. holder.
We must come back to that.
About this girl, miss holder.
You saw her return by the kitchen door, i presume?
I saw the man, too, in the gloom.
He is the greengrocer who brings our vegetables round.
His name is francis prosper.
And he is a man with a wooden leg?
Something like fear sprang up in the young lady’s expressive black eyes.
Why, you are like a magician, said she.
How do you know that?
She smiled, but there was no answering smile in holmes’ thin, eager face.
I should be very glad now to go upstairs, said he.
I shall probably wish to go over the outside of the house again.
Perhaps i had better take a look at the lower windows before i go up.
Now we shall go upstairs, said he at last.
Holmes went to the bureau first and looked hard at the lock.
Which key was used to open it?
That which my son himself indicated that of the cupboard of the lumber room.
That is it on the dressing table.
Sherlock holmes took it up and opened the bureau.
It is a noiseless lock, said he.
It is no wonder that it did not wake you.
This case, i presume, contains the coronet.
We must have a look at it.
He opened the case, and taking out the diadem he laid it upon the table.
Might i beg that you will break it off.
The banker recoiled in horror.
I should not dream of trying, said he.
Holmes suddenly bent his strength upon it, but without result.
An ordinary man could not do it.
Now, what do you think would happen if i did break it, mr. holder?
There would be a noise like a pistol shot.
I do not know what to think.
It is all dark to me.
But perhaps it may grow lighter as we go.
What do you think, miss holder?
I confess that i still share my uncle’s perplexity.
Your son had no shoes or slippers on when you saw him?
He had nothing on save only his trousers and shirt.
With your permission, mr. holder, i shall now continue my investigations outside.
But the gems, mr. holmes.
The banker wrung his hands.
I shall never see them again!
My opinion is in no way altered.
I would give my fortune to have them back.
I shall look into the matter between this and then.
It was not yet three when we found ourselves in our rooms once more.
I think that this should do, said he, glancing into the glass above the fireplace.
I hope that i may be back in a few hours.
He chucked it down into a corner and helped himself to a cup of tea.
I only looked in as i passed, said he.
I am going right on.
Oh, to the other side of the west end.
It may be some time before i get back.
Don’t wait up for me in case i should be late.
How are you getting on?
His eyes twinkled, and there was even a touch of colour upon his sallow cheeks.
Why, it is after nine now, i answered.
I should not be surprised if that were he.
I thought i heard a ring.
It was, indeed, our friend the financier.
I do not know what i have done to be so severely tried, said he.
Now i am left to a lonely and dishonoured age.
One sorrow comes close upon the heels of another.
My niece, mary, has deserted me.
Perhaps it was thoughtless of me to say so.
Do you think it points to suicide?
No, no, nothing of the kind.
It is perhaps the best possible solution.
I trust, mr. holder, that you are nearing the end of your troubles.
You have heard something, mr. holmes you have learned something!
Three thousand will cover the matter.
And there is a little reward, i fancy.
Have you your cheque book?
With a dazed face the banker made out the required check.
With a shriek of joy our client clutched it up.
There is one other thing you owe, mr. holder, said sherlock holmes rather sternly.
He caught up a pen.
Name the sum, and i will pay it.
No, the debt is not to me.
Then it was not arthur who took them?
I told you yesterday, and i repeat to day, that it was not.
You are sure of it!
Your news of this morning, however, may open his lips.
For heaven’s sake, tell me, then, what is this extraordinary mystery!
They have now fled together.
It is unfortunately more than possible it is certain.
Your niece knew nothing of such men.
I cannot, and i will not, believe it!
Cried the banker with an ashen face.
I will tell you, then, what occurred in your house last night.
His footmarks had pressed right through the snow, so long had he stood there.
She told him of the coronet.
In the scuffle, your son struck sir george and cut him over the eye.
He took the more chivalrous view, however, and preserved her secret.
What a blind fool i have been!
And his asking to be allowed to go out for five minutes!
How cruelly i have misjudged him!
I passed along the tradesmen’s path, but found it all trampled down and indistinguishable.
So far i was clear.
There could be no possible reason.
And who could it be who was her confederate?
But among them was sir george burnwell.
I had heard of him before as being a man of evil reputation among women.
It must have been he who wore those boots and retained the missing gems.
Well, your own good sense will suggest what measures i took next.
With these i journeyed down to streatham and saw that they exactly fitted the tracks.
I saw an ill dressed vagabond in the lane yesterday evening, said mr. holder.
I went and saw him.
At first, of course, he denied everything.
Then he became a little more reasonable.
That brought out the first signs of grief that he had shown.
A day which has saved england from a great public scandal, said the banker, rising.
Your skill has indeed exceeded all that i have heard of it.
As to what you tell me of poor mary, it goes to my very heart.
Not even your skill can inform me where she is now.
Therefore it is upon the logic rather than upon the crime that you should dwell.
But in avoiding the sensational, i fear that you may have bordered on the trivial.
Man, or at least criminal man, has lost all enterprise and originality.
I think that i have touched bottom at last, however.
This note i had this morning marks my zero point, i fancy.
He tossed a crumpled letter across to me.
I shall call at half past ten to morrow if i do not inconvenience you.
Do you know the young lady?
It is half past ten now.
Yes, and i have no doubt that is her ring.
It may turn out to be of more interest than you think.
It may be so in this case, also.
Well, let us hope so.
As he spoke the door opened and a young lady entered the room.
Pray take a seat, miss hunter.
I shall be happy to do anything that i can to serve you.
I advertised, and i answered advertisements, but without success.
That will do,’ said he i could not ask for anything better.
Capital!’ he seemed quite enthusiastic and rubbed his hands together in the most genial fashion.
You are looking for a situation, miss?’ he asked.
A little french, a little german, music, and drawing ’ tut, tut!’ he cried.
This is all quite beside the question.
There it is in a nutshell.
May i ask where you live, sir?’ said i. hampshire.
The copper beeches, five miles on the far side of winchester.
Oh, if you could see him killing cockroaches with a slipper!
You see no difficulty, heh?’ i should be happy to make myself useful.’ quite so.
In dress now, for example.
We are faddy people, you know faddy but kind hearted.
Heh?’ no,’ said i, considerably astonished at his words.
It has been considered artistic.
I could not dream of sacrificing it in this offhand fashion.
I am afraid that that is quite impossible,’ said i.
I am afraid that it is quite essential,’ said he.
Ah, very well then that quite settles the matter.
It is a pity, because in other respects you would really have done very nicely.
Do you desire your name to be kept upon the books?’ she asked.
You can hardly expect us to exert ourselves to find another such opening for you.
Besides, what use was my hair to me?
They are not very exacting, after all.
Your duties, as far as the child is concerned, are very light.
Let me know your train.
But you would not advise me to refuse?
What is the meaning of it all, mr. holmes?
Ah, i have no data.
Perhaps you have yourself formed some opinion?
Well, there seems to me to be only one possible solution.
Mr. rucastle seemed to be a very kind, good natured man.
But the money, mr. holmes, the money!
Well, yes, of course the pay is good too good.
That is what makes me uneasy.
There must be some strong reason behind.
Oh, you may carry that feeling away with you.
There is something distinctly novel about some of the features.
If you should find yourself in doubt or in danger danger!
What danger do you foresee?
Holmes shook his head gravely.
It would cease to be a danger if we could define it, said he.
She rose briskly from her chair with the anxiety all swept from her face.
I shall go down to hampshire quite easy in my mind now.
And she would need to be, said holmes gravely.
It was not very long before my friend’s prediction was fulfilled.
I can’t make bricks without clay.
The summons was a brief and urgent one.
Please be at the black swan hotel at winchester at midday to morrow, it said.
I am at my wit’s end.
Will you come with me?
Just look it up, then.
There is a train at half past nine, said i, glancing over my bradshaw.
That will do very nicely.
Are they not fresh and beautiful?
But holmes shook his head gravely.
You look at these scattered houses, and you are impressed by their beauty.
Who would associate crime with these dear old homesteads?
They always fill me with a certain horror.
But the reason is very obvious.
The pressure of public opinion can do in the town what the law cannot accomplish.
It is the five miles of country which makes the danger.
Still, it is clear that she is not personally threatened.
If she can come to winchester to meet us she can get away.
What can be the matter, then?
Can you suggest no explanation?
She had engaged a sitting room, and our lunch awaited us upon the table.
I am so delighted that you have come, she said earnestly.
Your advice will be altogether invaluable to me.
Pray tell us what has happened to you.
Let us have everything in its due order.
Holmes thrust his long thin legs out towards the fire and composed himself to listen.
It is only fair to them to say that.
But i cannot understand them, and i am not easy in my mind about them.
What can you not understand?
Their reasons for their conduct.
But you shall have it all just as it occurred.
Mrs. rucastle is not mad.
Mrs. rucastle seemed to me to be colourless in mind as well as in feature.
She impressed me neither favourably nor the reverse.
And yet she had some secret sorrow, this woman.
She would often be lost in deep thought, with the saddest look upon her face.
More than once i have surprised her in tears.
He is small for his age, with a head which is quite disproportionately large.
I shall try not to miss anything of importance.
There are only two, a man and his wife.
I assure you that it has not detracted in the tiniest iota from your appearance.
We shall now see how the electric blue dress will become you.
It could not have been a better fit if i had been measured for it.
You cannot imagine how comical he was, and i laughed until i was quite weary.
Two days later this same performance was gone through under exactly similar circumstances.
At first it seemed to be impossible, but i soon devised a means.
I confess that i was disappointed.
At least that was my first impression.
The road is an important highway, and there are usually people there.
No, i know no one in these parts.’ dear me!
Your narrative promises to be a most interesting one.
Look in here!’ said mr. rucastle, showing me a slit between two planks.
Don’t be frightened,’ said my employer, laughing at the start which i had given.
It’s only carlo, my mastiff.
As it emerged into the moonshine i saw what it was.
It walked slowly across the lawn and vanished into the shadow upon the other side.
And now i have a very strange experience to tell you.
The very first key fitted to perfection, and i drew the drawer open.
It was my coil of hair.
I took it up and examined it.
It was of the same peculiar tint, and the same thickness.
But then the impossibility of the thing obtruded itself upon me.
How could my hair have been locked in the drawer?
I laid the two tresses together, and i assure you that they were identical.
Puzzle as i would, i could make nothing at all of what it meant.
There was one wing, however, which appeared not to be inhabited at all.
He locked the door and hurried past me without a word or a look.
They were evidently all deserted.
I was preoccupied with business matters.’ i assured him that i was not offended.
Photography is one of my hobbies,’ said he.
I have made my dark room up there.
What an observant young lady we have come upon.
Who would have believed it?
I read suspicion there and annoyance, but no jest.
It was not mere curiosity, though i have my share of that.
They talk of woman’s instinct perhaps it was woman’s instinct which gave me that feeling.
It was only yesterday that the chance came.
I have no doubt at all that he had left it there.
I turned the key gently in the lock, opened the door, and slipped through.
The door itself was locked as well, and the key was not there.
Evidently there was a skylight which let in light from above.
A mad, unreasoning terror rose up in me at the sight, mr. holmes.
So,’ said he, smiling, it was you, then.
I was keenly on my guard against him.
I was foolish enough to go into the empty wing,’ i answered.
Why, what did you think?’ i asked.
Do you see?’ he was still smiling in the most amiable manner.
I am sure if i had known ’ well, then, you know now.
I suppose that i must have rushed past him into my room.
I remember nothing until i found myself lying on my bed trembling all over.
Then i thought of you, mr. holmes.
I could not live there longer without some advice.
They were all horrible to me.
If i could only bring you down all would be well.
My mind was soon made up.
I would send you a wire.
Holmes and i had listened spellbound to this extraordinary story.
I heard his wife tell mrs. rucastle that she could do nothing with him.
And the rucastles go out to night?
Is there a cellar with a good strong lock?
Do you think that you could perform one more feat?
We shall be at the copper beeches by seven o’clock, my friend and i.
The rucastles will be gone by that time, and toller will, we hope, be incapable.
There only remains mrs. toller, who might give the alarm.
We shall then look thoroughly into the affair.
Of course there is only one feasible explanation.
By a curious chance you came upon her tresses.
So much is fairly clear.
The most serious point in the case is the disposition of the child.
What on earth has that to do with it?
Don’t you see that the converse is equally valid.
I am sure that you are right, mr. holmes, cried our client.
Oh, let us lose not an instant in bringing help to this poor creature.
We must be circumspect, for we are dealing with a very cunning man.
We can do nothing until seven o’clock.
A loud thudding noise came from somewhere downstairs.
That is mrs. toller in the cellar, said she.
Her husband lies snoring on the kitchen rug.
Here are his keys, which are the duplicates of mr. rucastle’s.
You have done well indeed!
Now lead the way, and we shall soon see the end of this black business.
Holmes cut the cord and removed the transverse bar.
Then he tried the various keys in the lock, but without success.
No sound came from within, and at the silence holmes’ face clouded over.
I trust that we are not too late, said he.
I think, miss hunter, that we had better go in without you.
It was an old rickety door and gave at once before our united strength.
Together we rushed into the room.
The skylight above was open, and the prisoner gone.
We shall soon see how he managed it.
He swung himself up onto the roof.
Ah, yes, he cried, here’s the end of a long light ladder against the eaves.
That is how he did it.
He has come back and done it.
I tell you that he is a clever and dangerous man.
Said he, where’s your daughter?
The fat man cast his eyes round, and then up at the open skylight.
It is for me to ask you that, he shrieked, you thieves!
I have caught you, have i?
You are in my power.
He turned and clattered down the stairs as hard as he could go.
He’s gone for the dog!
I have my revolver, said i.
Better close the front door, cried holmes, and we all rushed down the stairs together.
Someone has loosed the dog.
It’s not been fed for two days.
Quick, quick, or it’ll be too late!
Mr. rucastle let me out when he came back before he went up to you.
Said holmes, looking keenly at her.
It is clear that mrs. toller knows more about this matter than anyone else.
Yes, sir, i do, and i am ready enough to tell what i know.
Mr. rucastle then, i presume, took to this system of imprisonment?
Mr. fowler was a very kind spoken, free handed gentleman, said mrs. toller serenely.
You have it, sir, just as it happened.
We left in pretty good time, and came after nightfall to klausenburgh.
Here i stopped for the night at the hotel royale.
What ought they to be in china?
They are very picturesque, but do not look prepossessing.
They are, however, i am told, very harmless and rather wanting in natural self assertion.
When i came close she bowed and said, the herr englishman?
Yes, i said, jonathan harker.
He went, but immediately returned with a letter my friend.
I am anxiously expecting you.
At the borgo pass my carriage will await you and will bring you to me.
Young herr, must you go?
I was just able to follow her by asking many questions.
I answered that it was the fourth of may.
She shook her head as she said again oh, yes!
I know that, but do you know what day it is?
Do you know where you are going, and what you are going to?
She was in such evident distress that i tried to comfort her, but without effect.
It was all very ridiculous but i did not feel comfortable.
I had only a couple of glasses of this, and nothing else.
And he crossed himself reverently.
The only stop he would make was a moment's pause to light his lamps.
I had to hold on.
The road grew more level, and we appeared to fly along.
The herr is not expected after all.
He said to the driver you are early to night, my friend.
You cannot deceive me, my friend i know too much, and my horses are swift.
There is a flask of slivovitz underneath the seat, if you should require it.
I felt a little strangely, and not a little frightened.
I waited with a sick feeling of suspense.
I grew dreadfully afraid, and the horses shared my fear.
Suddenly, away on our left, i saw a faint flickering blue flame.
For myself, i felt a sort of paralysis of fear.
I have not yet been able to see it by daylight.
Again i could not but notice his prodigious strength.
I stood in silence where i was, for i did not know what to do.
The time i waited seemed endless, and i felt doubts and fears crowding upon me.
What sort of place had i come to, and among what kind of people?
What sort of grim adventure was it on which i had embarked?
Mina would not like that.
I began to rub my eyes and pinch myself to see if i were awake.
But my flesh answered the pinching test, and my eyes were not to be deceived.
I was indeed awake and among the carpathians.
Enter freely and of your own will!
Again he said welcome to my house.
Go safely and leave something of the happiness you bring!
Come in the night air is chill, and you must need to eat and rest.
I protested but he insisted nay, sir, you are my guest.
It is late, and my people are not available.
Let me see to your comfort myself.
Passing through this, he opened another door, and motioned me to enter.
I trust you will find all you wish.
I found supper already laid out.
I handed to him the sealed letter which mr. hawkins had entrusted to me.
One passage of it, at least, gave me a thrill of pleasure.
He is discreet and silent, and has grown into manhood in my service.
The general effect was one of extraordinary pallor.
Strange to say, there were hairs in the centre of the palm.
The nails were long and fine, and cut to a sharp point.
The count's eyes gleamed, and he said listen to them the children of the night.
Then he rose and said but you must be tired.
I have to be away till the afternoon so sleep well and dream well!
I am all in a sea of wonders.
God keep me, if only for the sake of those dear to me!
I slept till late in the day, and awoke of my own accord.
Do not wait for me.
D. i set to and enjoyed a hearty meal.
But still in none of the rooms is there a mirror.
The door opposite mine i tried, but found it locked.
Whilst i was looking at the books, the door opened, and the count entered.
As yet i only know your tongue through books.
To you, my friend, i look that i know it to speak.
But, count, i said, you know and speak english thoroughly!
Indeed, i said, you speak excellently.
That is not enough for me.
Our ways are not your ways, and there shall be to you many strange things.
And, dear sir, even if he did he would not know what to do.
Even you would not, i dare be sworn, be able to find these places again?
There you are right, i said.
I know no more than the dead where even to look for them.
Then we drifted into other matters.
We went thoroughly into the business of the purchase of the estate at purfleet.
The closed gates are of heavy old oak and iron, all eaten with rust.
It is not, however, visible from the grounds.
When i had finished, he said i am glad that it is old and big.
I rejoice also that there is a chapel of old times.
Presently, with an excuse, he left me, asking me to put all my papers together.
It was the better part of an hour when the count returned.
He said still at your books?
But you must not work always.
Come i am informed that your supper is ready.
But he sat as on the previous night, and chatted whilst i ate.
How remiss i am to let you stay up so long.
So i pulled the curtains again, and have written of this day.
I wish i were safe out of it, or that i had never come.
I have only the count to speak with, and he!
I fear i am myself the only living soul within the place.
If it does i am lost.
Let me say at once how i stand or seem to.
I had hung my shaving glass by the window, and was just beginning to shave.
In starting i had cut myself slightly, but did not notice it at the moment.
But there was no reflection of him in the mirror!
I drew away, and his hand touched the string of beads which held the crucifix.
Take care, he said, take care how you cut yourself.
It is more dangerous than you think in this country.
It is a foul bauble of man's vanity.
Then he withdrew without a word.
It is strange that as yet i have not seen the count eat or drink.
He must be a very peculiar man!
After breakfast i did a little exploring in the castle.
I went out on the stairs, and found a room looking towards the south.
The castle is on the very edge of a terrible precipice.
A stone falling from the window would fall a thousand feet without touching anything!
The castle is a veritable prison, and i am a prisoner!
I am thinking still, and as yet have come to no definite conclusion.
Bless that good, good woman who hung the crucifix round my neck!
For it is a comfort and a strength to me whenever i touch it.
To night he may talk of himself, if i turn the conversation that way.
I must be very careful, however, not to awake his suspicion.
I have had a long talk with the count.
It seemed to have in it a whole history of the country.
He held up his arms.
This was a dracula indeed!
They said that he thought only of himself.
What good are peasants without a leader?
Where ends the war without a brain and heart to conduct it?
The warlike days are over.
It was by this time close on morning, and we went to bed.
First, he asked if a man in england might have two solicitors or more.
But, said he, i could be at liberty to direct myself.
Do you wish me to stay so long?
I asked, for my heart grew cold at the thought.
I desire it much nay, i will take no refusal.
What could i do but bow acceptance?
As he spoke he handed me three sheets of note paper and three envelopes.
One of the letters was directed to samuel f. billington, no.
The second and fourth were unsealed.
I was just about to look at them when i saw the door handle move.
You will, i hope, find all things as you wish.
I endorse the last words written, but this time there is no doubt in question.
I shall not fear to sleep in any place where he is not.
When he left me i went to my room.
I am beginning to feel this nocturnal existence tell on me.
It is destroying my nerve.
I start at my own shadow, and am full of all sorts of horrible imaginings.
God knows that there is ground for my terrible fear in this accursed place!
I drew back behind the stonework, and looked carefully out.
What i saw was the count's head coming out from the window.
At first i could not believe my eyes.
Once more have i seen the count go out in his lizard fashion.
He vanished into some hole or window.
I went back to the room, and taking a lamp, tried all the doors.
On the latter side, as well as to the former, there was a great precipice.
It is nineteenth century up to date with a vengeance.
God preserve my sanity, for to this i am reduced.
Safety and the assurance of safety are things of the past.
Let me be calm, for out of that way lies madness indeed.
I begin to get new lights on certain things which have puzzled me.
The habit of entering accurately must help to soothe me.
I shall fear to doubt what he may say!
The count's warning came into my mind, but i took a pleasure in disobeying it.
In the moonlight opposite me were three young women, ladies by their dress and manner.
The fair girl shook her head coquettishly, and the other two urged her on.
You are first, and we shall follow yours is the right to begin.
The other added he is young and strong there are kisses for us all.
I lay quiet, looking out under my eyelashes in an agony of delightful anticipation.
The girl went on her knees, and bent over me, simply gloating.
I closed my eyes in a languorous ecstasy and waited waited with beating heart.
But at that instant, another sensation swept through me as quick as lightning.
Never did i imagine such wrath and fury, even to the demons of the pit.
His eyes were positively blazing.
How dare you cast eyes on him when i had forbidden it?
Back, i tell you all!
This man belongs to me!
Beware how you meddle with him, or you'll have to deal with me.
I must awaken him, for there is work to be done.
Are we to have nothing to night?
For answer he nodded his head.
One of the women jumped forward and opened it.
Then the horror overcame me, and i sank down unconscious.
Chapter iv jonathan harker's journal continued i awoke in my own bed.
If it be that i had not dreamt, the count must have carried me here.
I must watch for proof.
He would have taken or destroyed it.
I fear it was no dream, and must act on this surmise.
I am surely in the toils.
Something may occur which will give me a chance to escape.
I know now the span of my life.
A band of szgany have come to the castle, and are encamped in the courtyard.
These szgany are gipsies i have notes of them in my book.
There are thousands of them in hungary and transylvania, who are almost outside all law.
I have already spoken them through my window to begin acquaintanceship.
I have written the letters.
Mina's is in shorthand, and i simply ask mr. hawkins to communicate with her.
I could do no more.
I stole back to the study, and began to read.
As the count did not come in, i have written here....
So it cannot matter to us.
Your letters are sacred to me.
Your pardon, my friend, that unknowingly i did break the seal.
Will you not cover it again?
I could only redirect it and hand it to him in silence.
When he went out of the room i could hear the key turn softly.
A minute later i went over and tried it, and the door was locked.
There is the surest rest.
Despair has its own calms.
They had also their long staves in hand.
Again a shock my door was fastened on the outside.
Then i ran to the window and cried to them.
Shortly afterwards, i heard the cracking of their whips die away in the distance.
Last night the count left me early, and locked himself into his own room.
I thought i would watch for the count, for there is something going on.
The szgany are quartered somewhere in the castle and are doing work of some kind.
I drew back and watched carefully, and saw the whole man emerge.
There could be no doubt as to his quest, and in my garb, too!
More and more they gathered till they seemed to take dim phantom shapes.
I sat down and simply cried.
I rushed to the window, and throwing it up, peered out between the bars.
She was leaning against a corner of the gateway.
His call seemed to be answered from far and wide by the howling of wolves.
Before long they streamed away singly, licking their lips.
How can i escape from this dreadful thing of night and gloom and fear?
Let me not think of it.
I have not yet seen the count in the daylight.
If i could only get into his room!
But there is no possible way.
The door is always locked, no way for me.
Yes, there is a way, if one dares to take it.
Where his body has gone why may not another body go?
I have seen him myself crawl from his window.
Why should not i imitate him, and go in by his window?
The chances are desperate, but my need is more desperate still.
God help me in my task!
I must put down every detail in order.
I took off my boots, and ventured out on the desperate way.
Then i looked around for the count, but, with surprise and gladness, made a discovery.
None of it that i noticed was less than three hundred years old.
There were also chains and ornaments, some jewelled, but all of them old and stained.
At one corner of the room was a heavy door.
As i went through the passage the smell grew closer and heavier.
I bent over him, and tried to find any sign of life, but in vain.
By the side of the box was its cover, pierced with holes here and there.
I came back to the library, and read there till i fell asleep.
But i am in hopes that i shall see more of you at castle dracula.
I suspected him, and determined to test his sincerity.
Because, dear sir, my coachman and horses are away on a mission.
But i would walk with pleasure.
I want to get away at once.
He said and your baggage?
I do not care about it.
I can send for it some other time.
Come with me, my dear young friend.
Close at hand came the howling of many wolves.
To my intense astonishment i saw that it was unlocked.
Suspiciously, i looked all round, but could see no key of any kind.
I knew then that to struggle at the moment against the count was useless.
With such allies as these at his command, i could do nothing.
And covered my face with my hands to hide my tears of bitter disappointment.
I went to it softly and listened.
Your time is not yet come.
To morrow night is yours!
As i appeared they all joined in a horrible laugh, and ran away.
I came back to my room and threw myself on my knees.
It is then so near the end?
Lord, help me, and those to whom i am dear!
These may be the last words i ever write in this diary.
Then came the welcome cock crow, and i felt that i was safe.
With a glad heart, i opened my door and ran down to the hall.
I had seen that the door was unlocked, and now escape was before me.
But the door would not move.
I could see the bolt shot.
It had been locked after i left the count.
He might kill me, but death now seemed the happier choice of evils.
It was empty, but that was as i expected.
I could not see a key anywhere, but the heap of gold remained.
I knew now well enough where to find the monster i sought.
It seemed as if the whole awful creature were simply gorged with blood.
He lay like a filthy leech, exhausted with his repletion.
I felt all over the body, but no sign could i find of the key.
Then i stopped and looked at the count.
There was a mocking smile on the bloated face which seemed to drive me mad.
The very thought drove me mad.
A terrible desire came upon me to rid the world of such a monster.
When i ran to push it open, i found that it was hopelessly fast.
There is a sound of hammering it is the box being nailed down.
I am alone in the castle with those awful women.
Mina is a woman, and there is nought in common.
They are devils of the pit!
I shall take some of the gold with me, lest i want it later.
I may find a way from this dreadful place.
And then away for home!
Away to the quickest and nearest train!
At its foot a man may sleep as a man.
Chapter v letter from miss mina murray to miss lucy westenra.
The life of an assistant schoolmistress is sometimes trying.
When i am with you i shall keep a diary in the same way.
I will tell you of my little plans when we meet.
I have just had a few hurried lines from jonathan from transylvania.
He is well, and will be returning in about a week.
I am longing to hear all his news.
It must be so nice to see strange countries.
I wonder if we i mean jonathan and i shall ever see them together.
There is the ten o'clock bell ringing.
Tell me all the news when you write.
You have not told me anything for a long time.
I hear rumours, and especially of a tall, handsome, curly haired man???
Letter, lucy westenra to mina murray .
Besides, i have nothing to tell you.
There is really nothing to interest you.
Some one has evidently been telling tales.
He is an excellent parti , being handsome, well off, and of good birth.
He is a doctor and really clever.
I can fancy what a wonderful power he must have over his patients.
I know that from my glass.
Do you ever try to read your own face?
That is slang again, but never mind arthur says that every day.
There, it is all out.
Oh, mina, couldn't you guess?
But oh, mina, i love him i love him i love him!
There, that does me good.
I do not know how i am writing this even to you.
Bless me in your prayers and, mina, pray for my happiness.
I need not tell you this is a secret.
L. letter, lucy westenra to mina murray .
My dearest mina, thanks, and thanks, and thanks again for your sweet letter.
It was so nice to be able to tell you and to have your sympathy.
My dear, it never rains but it pours.
How true the old proverbs are.
Three proposals in one day!
I feel sorry, really and truly sorry, for two of the poor fellows.
Oh, mina, i am so happy that i don't know what to do with myself.
Some girls are so vain!
A woman ought to tell her husband everything don't you think so, dear?
And i must be fair.
Well, my dear, number one came just before lunch.
He was very cool outwardly, but was nervous all the same.
He spoke to me, mina, very straightforwardly.
Well, my dear, number two came after lunch.
Mr. quincey p. morris found me alone.
It seems that a man always does find a girl alone.
But this is a way slang has.
Here was i almost making fun of this great hearted, true gentleman.
But this is heresy, and i must not say it.
My dear, i'm going to have a pretty lonely walk between this and kingdom come.
Won't you give me one kiss?
It'll be something to keep off the darkness now and then.
And he so sad so i leant over and kissed him.
Thank you for your sweet honesty to me, and good bye.
I know i would if i were free only i don't want to be free.
Oh, about number three i needn't tell you of number three, need i?
Ebb tide in appetite to day.
Cannot eat, cannot rest, so diary instead.
I picked out one who has afforded me a study of much interest.
In my manner of doing it there was, i now see, something of cruelty.
In selfish men caution is as secure an armour for their foes as for themselves.
Letter, quincey p. morris to hon.
Won't you let this be at my camp fire to morrow night?
There will only be one other, our old pal at the korea, jack seward.
Yours, as ever and always, quincey p. morris.
Telegram from arthur holmwood to quincey p. morris.
Count me in every time.
I bear messages which will make both your ears tingle.
This is a lovely place.
I shall come and sit here very often myself and work.
They seem to do nothing all day but sit up here and talk.
A heavy sea wall runs along outside of it.
I must ask the old man about this he is coming this way....
He is a funny old man.
Them things be all wore out.
The steps are a great feature on the place.
I think they must originally have had something to do with the abbey.
I shall go home too.
They will be home by this.
He will not admit anything, and downfaces everybody.
They be nowt but air blebs.
It makes me ireful to think o' them.
Lies all of them, nothin' but lies of one kind or another!
Surely these tombstones are not all wrong?
The whole thing be only lies.
Now look you here you come here a stranger, an' you see this kirk garth.
I knew it had something to do with the church.
Then that be just where the lie comes in.
He nudged one of his companions, and they all laughed.
How could they be otherwise?
Look at that one, the aftest abaft the bier bank read it!
Murdered off the coast of andres!
An' you consated his body lay under!
There be the steans around ye.
Ye can, with your young eyes, read the small print of the lies from here.
I have me antherums aboot it!
Do you think that will be really necessary?
Well, what else be they tombstones for?
To please their relatives, i suppose.
To please their relatives, you suppose!
This he said with intense scorn.
Read the lies on that thruff stean, he said.
This tomb was erected by his sorrowing mother to her dearly beloved son.
He was the only son of his mother, and she was a widow.
Really, mr. swales, i don't see anything very funny in that!
She spoke her comment very gravely and somewhat severely.
Ye don't see aught funny!
Twarn't for crows then, for it brought the clegs and the dowps to him.
That's the way he fell off the rocks.
Don't ye fash about them as lies under ye, or that doesn' lie there either!
There's the clock, an' i must gang.
My service to ye, ladies!
I came up here alone, for i am very sad.
There was no letter for me.
I hope there cannot be anything the matter with jonathan.
The clock has just struck nine.
I wonder where jonathan is and if he is thinking of me!
I wish he were here.
The case of renfield grows more interesting the more i get to understand the man.
He has certain qualities very largely developed selfishness, secrecy, and purpose.
I wish i could get at what is the object of the latter.
His pets are of odd sorts.
Just now his hobby is catching flies.
He has at present such a quantity that i have had myself to expostulate.
He thought for a moment, and then said may i have three days?
I shall clear them away.
Of course, i said that would do.
This gave me an idea, or the rudiment of one.
I must watch how he gets rid of his spiders.
It will be a whole idea soon, and then, oh, unconscious cerebration!
You will have to give the wall to your conscious brother.
He has managed to get a sparrow, and has already partially tamed it.
His means of taming is simple, for already the spiders have diminished.
His eagerness betrayed him as he answered oh, yes, i would like a cat!
I only asked for a kitten lest you should refuse me a cat.
No one would refuse me a kitten, would they?
The man is an undeveloped homicidal maniac.
I shall see him in the morning early.
Visited renfield very early, before the attendant went his rounds.
Found him up and humming a tune.
I looked around for his birds, and not seeing them, asked him where they were.
He replied, without turning round, that they had all flown away.
My homicidal maniac is of a peculiar kind.
What would have been his later steps?
It would almost be worth while to complete the experiment.
It might be done if there were only a sufficient cause.
Men sneered at vivisection, and yet look at its results to day!
If only there were a sufficient cause!
How well the man reasoned lunatics always do within their own scope.
I wonder at how many lives he values a man, or if at only one.
He has closed the account most accurately, and to day begun a new record.
How many of us begin a new record with each day of our lives?
And there is also something about the shorthand symbols that makes it different from writing.
I am unhappy about lucy and about jonathan.
That is not like jonathan i do not understand it, and it makes me uneasy.
Mr. holmwood he is the hon.
Thank god, lucy's health keeps up.
She has lost that anæmic look which she had.
I pray it will all last.
Oh, i do hope he is not ill.
He surely would have written.
I look at that last letter of his, but somehow it does not satisfy me.
It does not read like him, and yet it is his writing.
There is no mistake of that.
Another three days, and no news.
This suspense is getting dreadful.
I must only pray to god for patience.
Lucy is more excitable than ever, but is otherwise well.
I must try to watch it and learn the weather signs.
The horizon is lost in a grey mist.
Here comes old mr. swales.
I have been quite touched by the change in the poor old man.
Some day soon the angel of death will sound his trumpet for me.
But don't ye dooal an' greet, my deary!
But i'm content, for it's comin' to me, my deary, and comin' quick.
It may be comin' while we be lookin' and wonderin'.
It's in the air i feel it comin'.
Lord, make me answer cheerful when my call comes!
He held up his arms devoutly, and raised his hat.
His mouth moved as though he were praying.
It all touched me, and upset me very much.
I was glad when the coastguard came along, with his spy glass under his arm.
We'll hear more of her before this time to morrow.
Then without warning the tempest broke.
No other form could be seen on deck at all.
However, all took place more quickly than it takes to write these words.
This seemed to pique general curiosity, and quite a number of people began to run.
Crew, five hands ... two mates, cook, and myself .
Boarded by turkish customs officers.
More customs officers and flagboat of guarding squadron.
Work of officers thorough, but quick.
At dark passed into archipelago.
Seemed scared, but would not speak out.
Men all steady fellows, who sailed with me before.
Mate lost temper with one of them that day and struck him.
Expected fierce quarrel, but all was quiet.
Could not account for it.
Men more downcast than ever.
Mate getting very impatient with them feared some trouble ahead.
To allay it, i shall to day search entire ship carefully from stem to stern.
Men much relieved when search over, and went back to work cheerfully.
First mate scowled, but said nothing.
Men seem to have forgotten their dread.
Mate cheerful again, and all on good terms.
Praised men for work in bad weather.
Passed gibralter and out through straits.
There seems some doom over this ship.
Like the first, he came off his watch and was not seen again.
No sleep for any one.
Hardly know how to set a watch, since no one fit to go on.
Second mate volunteered to steer and watch, and let men snatch a few hours' sleep.
Wind abating seas still terrific, but feel them less, as ship is steadier.
Had single watch to night, as crew too tired to double.
When morning watch came on deck could find no one except steersman.
Raised outcry, and all came on deck.
Thorough search, but no one found.
Are now without second mate, and crew in a panic.
Mate and i agreed to go armed henceforth and wait for any sign of cause.
Rejoiced we are nearing england.
Weather fine, all sails set.
Only self and mate and two hands left to work ship.
Two days of fog, and not a sail sighted.
Not having power to work sails, have to run before wind.
Dare not lower, as could not raise them again.
We seem to be drifting to some terrible doom.
Mate now more demoralised than either of men.
His stronger nature seems to have worked inwardly against himself.
Men are beyond fear, working stolidly and patiently, with minds made up to worst.
They are russian, he roumanian.
Woke up from few minutes' sleep by hearing a cry, seemingly outside my port.
Could see nothing in fog.
Rushed on deck, and ran against mate.
Tells me heard cry and ran, but no sign of man on watch.
The wind was steady, and as we ran before it there was no yawing.
I dared not leave it, so shouted for the mate.
After a few seconds he rushed up on deck in his flannels.
He looked wild eyed and haggard, and i greatly fear his reason has given way.
It was in the bows, and looking out.
And as he spoke he took his knife and drove it savagely into space.
Then he went on but it is here, and i'll find it.
It is in the hold, perhaps in one of those boxes.
I'll unscrew them one by one and see.
And, with a warning look and his finger on his lip, he went below.
There was springing up a choppy wind, and i could not leave the helm.
He is mad, stark, raving mad, and it's no use my trying to stop him.
So here i stay, and mind the helm, and write these notes.
I can only trust in god and wait till the fog clears.
It is nearly all over now.
He cried, and then looked round on the blanket of fog.
I know the secret now.
The sea will save me from him, and it is all that is left!
I suppose i know the secret too, now.
How am i to account for all these horrors when i get to port?
When i get to port!
Still fog, which the sunrise cannot pierce.
I know there is sunrise because i am a sailor, why else i know not.
God forgive me, but the mate was right to jump overboard.
But i am captain, and i must not leave my ship.
I am growing weaker, and the night is coming on.
Lucy was very restless all night, and i, too, could not sleep.
When a sharp puff came it seemed to be like a distant gun.
Strangely enough, lucy did not wake but she got up twice and dressed herself.
But, oh, is he on land or sea?
Where is he, and how?
I am getting fearfully anxious about him.
If i only knew what to do, and could do anything!
The funeral of the poor sea captain to day was most touching.
We had a lovely view, and saw the procession nearly all the way.
Poor lucy seemed much upset.
Perhaps he had seen death with his dying eyes!
The dog is always with him.
She will be dreaming of this to night, i am sure.
She ought not to have much inclination for sleep walking then.
We had a lovely walk.
I believe we should have shocked the new woman with our appetites.
Men are more tolerant, bless them!
The young curate came in, however, and mrs. westenra asked him to stay for supper.
Lucy is asleep and breathing softly.
She has more colour in her cheeks than usual, and looks, oh, so sweet.
And a nice job she will make of it, too!
There's some consolation in that.
I am so happy to night, because dear lucy seems better.
No sleep now, so i may as well write.
I am too agitated to sleep.
We have had such an adventure, such an agonising experience.
I fell asleep as soon as i had closed my diary....
I lit a match and found that she was not in the room.
The door was shut, but not locked, as i had left it.
Dressing gown would mean house dress, outside.
Dressing gown and dress were both in their places.
I ran downstairs and looked in the sitting room.
Finally i came to the hall door and found it open.
It was not wide open, but the catch of the lock had not caught.
I took a big, heavy shawl and ran out.
There was undoubtedly something, long and black, bending over the half reclining white figure.
I called in fright, lucy!
Lucy did not answer, and i ran on to the entrance of the churchyard.
She was quite alone, and there was not a sign of any living thing about.
When i bent over her i could see that she was still asleep.
As we passed along, the gravel hurt my feet, and lucy noticed me wince.
She stopped and wanted to insist upon my taking my shoes but i would not.
Fortune favoured us, and we got home without meeting a soul.
My heart beat so loud all the time that sometimes i thought i should faint.
I hope i did right.
Lucy slept till i woke her and seemed not to have even changed her side.
I was sorry to notice that my clumsiness with the safety pin hurt her.
Indeed, it might have been serious, for the skin of her throat was pierced.
Fortunately it cannot leave a scar, as it is so tiny.
We passed a happy day.
The air was clear, and the sun bright, and there was a cool breeze.
I must only be patient.
I woke with the dawn, and heard the birds chirping outside of the window.
Another quiet day, and to bed with the key on my wrist as before.
I got up quietly, and pulling aside the blind, looked out.
She did not stir again all night.
On the east cliff, reading and writing all day.
This afternoon she made a funny remark.
They are just the same.
It was such an odd expression, coming apropos of nothing, that it quite startled me.
We never refer to it so i said nothing, and we went home to dinner.
Lucy had a headache and went early to bed.
She did not notice or make any movement whatever.
I fear she is fretting about something.
I wish i could find out what it is.
Lucy was languid and tired, and slept on after we had been called.
We had a happy surprise at breakfast.
Arthur's father is better, and wants the marriage to come off soon.
Lucy is full of quiet joy, and her mother is glad and sorry at once.
Later on in the day she told me the cause.
She confided to me that she has got her death warrant.
At any time, even now, a sudden shock would be almost sure to kill her.
No diary for two whole days.
I have not had the heart to write.
Some sort of shadowy pall seems to be coming over our happiness.
I do not understand lucy's fading away as she is doing.
They are like little white dots with red centres.
Letter, samuel f. billington son, solicitors, whitby, to messrs. carter, paterson co., london.
Dear sirs, herewith please receive invoice of goods sent by great northern railway.
We are, dear sirs, faithfully yours, samuel f. billington son.
Letter, messrs. carter, paterson co., london, to messrs. billington son, whitby.
We are, dear sirs, yours respectfully.
Pro carter, paterson co. mina murray's journal.
I am happy to day, and write sitting on the seat in the churchyard.
Lucy is ever so much better.
Last night she slept well all night, and did not disturb me once.
If she were in any way anæmic i could understand it, but she is not.
She is in gay spirits and full of life and cheerfulness.
I saw you do it before i felt you.
Then she began to laugh.
It seemed a little uncanny to me, and i listened to her breathlessly.
At last, news of jonathan.
The dear fellow has been ill that is why he did not write.
I am not afraid to think it or say it, now that i know.
Mr. hawkins sent me on the letter, and wrote himself, oh, so kindly.
My journey is all mapped out, and my luggage ready.
I must write no more i must keep it to say to jonathan, my husband.
The letter that he has seen and touched must comfort me till we meet.
Letter, sister agatha, hospital of st. joseph and ste.
Mary, buda pesth, to miss wilhelmina murray.
Believe me, yours, with sympathy and all blessings, sister agatha.
P. s. my patient being asleep, i open this to let you know something more.
All blessings to you both!
Be assured that he is well cared for.
He has won all hearts by his sweetness and gentleness.
But be careful of him for safety's sake.
There are, i pray god and st. joseph and ste.
Mary, many, many, happy years for you both.
Strange and sudden change in renfield last night.
Would not condescend to talk with him at all.
The attendant thinks it is some sudden form of religious mania which has seized him.
The combination is a dreadful one.
At nine o'clock i visited him myself.
It looks like religious mania, and he will soon think that he himself is god.
These infinitesimal distinctions between man and man are too paltry for an omnipotent being.
How these madmen give themselves away!
Oh, if men only knew!
For half an hour or more renfield kept getting excited in greater and greater degree.
At first he made no reply, but at length said testily bother them all!
I don't care a pin about them.
You don't mean to tell me you don't care about spiders?
I am weary to night and low in spirits.
I cannot but think of lucy, and how different things might have been.
If i don't sleep at once, chloral, the modern morpheus c hcl o. h o!
I must be careful not to let it grow into a habit.
No, i shall take none to night!
I have thought of lucy, and i shall not dishonour her by mixing the two.
If need be, to night shall be sleepless.... later.
Glad i made the resolution gladder that i kept to it.
Those ideas of his might work out dangerously with strangers.
The attendant was waiting for me.
His attention was called by the sound of the window being wrenched out.
He was only in his night gear, and cannot be far off.
He is a bulky man, and couldn't get through the window.
I got a ladder myself, and crossing the wall, dropped down on the other side.
I heard him say i am here to do your bidding, master.
I am your slave, and you will reward me, for i shall be faithful.
I have worshipped you long and afar off.
He is a selfish old beggar anyhow.
His manias make a startling combination.
When we closed in on him he fought like a tiger.
He is immensely strong, for he was more like a wild beast than a man.
He is safe now at any rate.
Just now he spoke coherent words for the first time i shall be patient, master.
It is coming coming coming!
So i took the hint, and came too.
Chapter ix letter, mina harker to lucy westenra.
I found my dear one, oh, so thin and pale and weak looking.
At least, he wants me to believe so, and i shall never ask.
He has not forgotten you or what he owes to you.
His fear was of great and terrible things, which no mortal can treat of.
The idea of my being jealous about jonathan!
You know i have had brain fever, and that is to be mad.
The secret is here, and i do not want to know it.
I want to take up my life here, with our marriage.
Are you willing, wilhelmina, to share my ignorance?
He fell back exhausted, and i put the book under his pillow, and kissed him.
I feel very solemn, but very, very happy.
He answered his 'i will' firmly and strongly.
The dear sisters were so kind.
I must tell you of my wedding present.
Well, my dear, what could i say?
I shall post this at once, and, perhaps, write you very soon again.
I must stop, for jonathan is waking i must attend to my husband!
Your ever loving mina harker.
Letter, lucy westenra to mina harker.
I wish you could be coming home soon enough to stay with us here.
The strong air would soon restore jonathan it has quite restored me.
I have an appetite like a cormorant, am full of life, and sleep well.
Arthur says i am getting fat.
By the way, i forgot to tell you that arthur is here.
There he is, calling to me.
So no more just at present from your loving lucy.
P. s. mother sends her love.
She seems better, poor dear.
The case of renfield grows even more interesting.
He has now so far quieted that there are spells of cessation from his passion.
For the first week after his attack he was perpetually violent.
I was satisfied with his present condition, and directed him to be relieved.
The attendants hesitated, but finally carried out my wishes without protest.
Fancy me hurting you !
I must find out later on.
To night he will not speak.
He will only say i don't take any stock in cats.
I have more to think of now, and i can wait i can wait.
After a while i left him.
I wish i could get some clue to the cause.
It would almost seem as if there was some influence which came and went.
We shall to night play sane wits against mad ones.
He escaped before without our help to night he shall escape with it.
How well disraeli knew life.
The poor soul's body will enjoy the relief even if his mind cannot appreciate it.
I am called the patient has once more escaped.
Renfield artfully waited until the attendant was entering the room to inspect.
Then he dashed out past him and flew down the passage.
I sent word for the attendants to follow.
As we were holding him a strange thing happened.
He suddenly redoubled his efforts, and then as suddenly grew calm.
I looked round instinctively, but could see nothing.
Without trouble we came back to the house.
I must imitate mina, and keep writing things down.
Then we can have long talks when we do meet.
I wonder when it will be.
I wish she were with me again, for i feel so unhappy.
Last night i seemed to be dreaming again just as i was at whitby.
Perhaps it is the change of air, or getting home again.
I wonder if i could sleep in mother's room to night.
I shall make an excuse and try.
Mother did not seem to take to my proposal.
She seems not too well herself, and doubtless she fears to worry me.
I wish i could remember them.
This morning i am horribly weak.
My face is ghastly pale, and my throat pains me.
Letter, arthur holmwood to dr. seward.
My dear jack, i want you to do me a favour.
I am sure that there is something preying on my dear girl's mind.
Telegram, arthur holmwood to seward.
Am summoned to see my father, who is worse.
Write me fully by to night's post to ring.
Letter from dr. seward to arthur holmwood.
I shall then say what i have done and propose doing.
I found miss westenra in seemingly gay spirits.
Then mrs. westenra went to lie down, and lucy was left with me.
She caught on to my meaning at once, and settled that matter in a word.
Tell arthur everything you choose.
I do not care for myself, but all for him!
So i am quite free.
I have asked him to come at once.
I shall see miss westenra to morrow again.
Letter, abraham van helsing, m. d., d.
Lit., etc., etc., to dr. seward.
My good friend, when i have received your letter i am already coming to you.
Till then good bye, my friend john.
Letter, dr. seward to hon.
My dear art, van helsing has come and gone.
Van helsing made a very careful examination of the patient.
He is, i fear, much concerned, but says he must think.
Tell him what i think, if you can guess it, if you will.
Nay, i am not jesting.
This is no jest, but life and death, perhaps more.
I asked what he meant by that, for he was very serious.
He would not give me any further clue.
He will speak plainly enough when the time comes, be sure.
I am to get his report to morrow if he can possibly make it.
In any case i am to have a letter.
Well, as to the visit.
That is much, my dear, ever were there that which i do not see.
To them i say pouf!
But the conditions of her are in no way anæmic.
I know well what she will say.
And yet there is cause there is always cause for everything.
I must go back home and think.
She charm me, and for her, if not for you or disease, i come.
And so now, art, you know all i know.
I shall keep stern watch.
I trust your poor father is rallying.
Zoöphagous patient still keeps up our interest in him.
He had only one outburst and that was yesterday at an unusual time.
Just before the stroke of noon he began to grow restless.
The attendant knew the symptoms, and at once summoned aid.
I cannot quite understand it.
Another change in my patient.
No hope for me now unless i do it for myself!
I think it would be good for me.
The flies like it, too, and i like the flies therefore i like it.
I wish i could fathom his mind.
No, said he i am sick of all that rubbish!
He certainly is a wonderfully interesting study.
Telegram, seward, london, to van helsing, amsterdam.
Patient still better to day.
Good appetite sleeps naturally good spirits colour coming back.
Terrible change for the worse.
Come at once do not lose an hour.
I hold over telegram to holmwood till have seen you.
Chapter x letter, dr. seward to hon.
My dear art, my news to day is not so good.
Lucy this morning had gone back a bit.
In haste yours ever, john seward.
I waited till i had seen you, as i said in my telegram.
Right, my friend, he said, quite right!
Better he not know as yet perhaps he shall never know.
I pray so but if it be needed, then he shall know all.
And, my good friend john, let me caution you.
You deal with the madmen.
You and i shall keep as yet what we know here, and here.
I have for myself thoughts at the present.
Later i shall unfold to you.
It may do some good we may arrive at some decision.
He's good corn he will make good crop when the time comes.
I did not see the application, and told him so.
See you now, friend john?
He broke off, for he evidently saw that i understood.
Take then good note of it.
I counsel you, put down in record even your doubts and surmises.
Hereafter it may be of interest to you to see how true you guess.
We learn from failure, not from success!
When we were shown in, mrs. westenra met us.
She was alarmed, but not nearly so much as i expected to find her.
Van helsing and i were shown up to lucy's room.
Then van helsing beckoned to me, and we went gently out of the room.
Then he pulled me quickly in with him and closed the door.
He said this is dreadful.
There is no time to be lost.
There must be transfusion of blood at once.
Is it you or me?
I am younger and stronger, professor.
Then get ready at once.
I will bring up my bag.
He rushed up to me, saying in an eager whisper jack, i was so anxious.
I read between the lines of your letter, and have been in an agony.
The dad was better, so i ran down here to see for myself.
Is not that gentleman dr. van helsing?
I am so thankful to you, sir, for coming.
You are the lover of our dear miss.
She is bad, very, very bad.
Nay, my child, do not go like that.
For he suddenly grew pale and sat down in a chair almost fainting.
You are to help her.
You can do more than any that live, and your courage is your best help.
Tell me, and i shall do it.
There was fire in his eyes, and his open nostril quivered with intent.
Van helsing slapped him on the shoulder.
You are a man, and it is a man we want.
You are better than me, better than my friend john.
She wants blood, and blood she must have or die.
Our nerves are not so calm and our blood not so bright than yours!
Come now and be silent.
Say no word to madame you know how it is with her!
There must be no shock any knowledge of this would be one.
We all went up to lucy's room.
Arthur by direction remained outside.
Lucy turned her head and looked at us, but said nothing.
She was not asleep, but she was simply too weak to make the effort.
Her eyes spoke to us that was all.
Drink it off, like a good child.
See, i lift you so that to swallow is easy.
She had made the effort with success.
It astonished me how long the drug took to act.
This, in fact, marked the extent of her weakness.
The time seemed endless until sleep began to flicker in her eyelids.
Friend john, help to me!
So neither of us looked whilst he bent over her.
Then with swiftness, but with absolute method, van helsing performed the operation.
I could hear my own heart beat.
Presently he said in a soft voice do not stir an instant.
You attend him i will look to her.
When all was over i could see how much arthur was weakened.
He must not stay here.
I may take it, sir, that you are anxious of result.
Then bring it with you that in all ways the operation is successful.
When arthur had gone i went back to the room.
By the bedside sat van helsing, looking at her intently.
The velvet band again covered the red mark.
What do you make of it?
Well, said i, i can make nothing of it.
I must go back to amsterdam to night, he said.
There are books and things there which i want.
Shall i have a nurse?
We are the best nurses, you and i.
You must not sleep all the night.
And then we may begin.
What on earth do you mean?
He answered, as he hurried out.
If you leave her, and harm befall, you shall not sleep easy hereafter!
I sat up all night with lucy.
I was firm, however, and made preparations for my long vigil.
Afraid to go to sleep!
It is the boon we all crave for.
I don't know oh, i don't know.
And that is what is so terrible.
All this weakness comes to me in sleep until i dread the very thought.
But, my dear girl, you may sleep to night.
I am here watching you, and i can promise that nothing will happen.
Ah, i can trust you!
How good you are to me.
All night long i watched by her.
The report was good he had been quite quiet for the past day and night.
I was pretty tired and worn out when i got to hillingham.
Lucy was up and in cheerful spirits.
I would not argue the point, but went and had my supper.
Now, she said, you must stay here.
I shall leave this door open and my door too.
I feel so happy to night.
Somehow arthur feels very, very close to me.
I seem to feel his presence warm about me.
I know where my thoughts are.
My dear, my dear, your ears must tingle as you sleep, as mine do waking.
Oh, the blissful rest of last night!
How i slept, with that dear, good dr. seward watching me.
Thank everybody for being so good to me!
That is one of the things that we learn in an asylum, at any rate.
And how is our patient?
Well, when i left her, or rather when she left me, i answered.
Come, let us see, he said.
And together we went into the room.
As i passed over he moved back, and his exclamation of horror, gott in himmel!
Needed no enforcement from his agonised face.
I felt my knees begin to tremble.
I flew to the dining room, and returned with the decanter.
It beats, though but feebly.
All our work is undone we must begin again.
But i shall precaution take.
I shall give hypodermic injection of morphia.
He proceeded then, swiftly and deftly, to carry out his intent.
The professor watched me critically.
That will do, he said.
You took a great deal more from art.
If our young lover should turn up unexpected, as before, no word to him.
It would at once frighten him and enjealous him, too.
I followed out his orders, for i knew how right and wise they were.
Lucy chatted with me freely, and seemed quite unconscious that anything had happened.
I tried to keep her amused and interested.
You are looking pale yourself.
You want a wife to nurse and look after you a bit that you do!
The reaction came in excessive pallor as she turned imploring eyes on me.
I stay here to night, and i shall sit up with little miss myself.
You and i must watch the case, and we must have none other to know.
No, do not ask them think what you will.
Do not fear to think even the most not probable.
I was much touched by their kindness.
This afternoon i went over to hillingham.
Found van helsing in excellent spirits, and lucy much better.
Shortly after i had arrived, a big parcel from abroad came for the professor.
These are for you, miss lucy, he said.
Yes, my dear, but not for you to play with.
Here lucy made a wry face.
Aha, my pretty miss, that bring the so nice nose all straight again.
This is medicinal, but you do not know how.
They, like the lotus flower, make your trouble forgotten.
Whilst he was speaking, lucy had been examining the flowers and smelling them.
Why, these flowers are only common garlic.
Take care, for the sake of others if not for your own.
See, i place them myself in your room.
I make myself the wreath that you are to wear.
No telling to others that make so inquisitive questions.
I had to telegraph yesterday, or they would not have been here.
We went into the room, taking the flowers with us.
Oh, what have i done to be blessed with such friends?
Chapter xi lucy westenra's diary.
How good they all are to me.
I quite love that dear dr. van helsing.
I wonder why he was so anxious about these flowers.
He positively frightened me, he was so fierce.
And yet he must have been right, for i feel comfort from them already.
I shall not mind any flapping outside the window.
I never liked garlic before, but to night it is delightful!
There is peace in its smell i feel sleep coming already.
Called at the berkeley and found van helsing, as usual, up to time.
The carriage ordered from the hotel was waiting.
The professor took his bag, which he always brings with him now.
Let all be put down exactly.
Van helsing and i arrived at hillingham at eight o'clock.
When we entered we met mrs. westenra coming out of the morning room.
She is always an early riser.
The dear child is still asleep.
The professor smiled, and looked quite jubilant.
He rubbed his hands together, and said aha!
I thought i had diagnosed the case.
Lucy's state this morning is due in part to me.
How you do mean, ma'am?
She was sleeping soundly so soundly that even my coming did not wake her.
But the room was awfully stuffy.
You will be pleased with her, i am sure.
She moved off into her boudoir, where she usually breakfasted early.
As she had spoken, i watched the professor's face, and saw it turn ashen grey.
Then, for the first time in my life, i saw van helsing break down.
Then he raised his arms again, as though appealing to the whole universe.
Oh, how we are beset!
How are all the powers of the devils against us!
Suddenly he jumped to his feet.
Come, he said, come, we must see and act.
Once again i drew up the blind, whilst van helsing went towards the bed.
He wore a look of stern sadness and infinite pity.
As i expected, he murmured, with that hissing inspiration of his which meant so much.
To day you must operate.
As he spoke he took off his coat and rolled up his shirt sleeve.
This time i watched whilst van helsing recruited himself and rested.
What does it all mean?
Four days and nights of peace.
I am getting so strong again that i hardly know myself.
I go to bed now without any fear of sleep.
I do not even try to keep awake.
But i need not be watched i am well enough to be left alone.
Perilous adventure of our interviewer.
Interview with the keeper in the zoölogical gardens.
You'll excoose me refoosin' to talk of perfeshunal subjects afore meals.
How do you mean, ask them questions?
I queried, wishful to get him into a talkative humour.
Without offence did i tell yer to go to 'ell?
Drive along with your questions.
I know what yer a comin' at, that 'ere escaped wolf.
I want you to give me your view of it.
This 'ere is about the 'ole story.
He was a nice well behaved wolf, that never gave no trouble to talk of.
But, there, you can't trust wolves no more nor women.
Don't you mind him, sir!
Broke in mrs. tom, with a cheery laugh.
But there ain't no 'arm in 'im.
Oh no, they wouldn't like me,' 'e says.
Ow yes, they would,' says i, a imitatin' of him.
Are you in the business yourself?
No' says he, 'not exactly in the business, but i 'ave made pets of several.
And with that he lifts his 'at as perlite as a lord, and walks away.
There warn't nothing for them to 'owl at.
And that's all i know for certing.
Did any one else see anything?
My own belief was that the 'armony 'ad got into his 'ead.
Now, mr. bilder, can you account in any way for the escape of the wolf?
Right y'are, sir, he said briskly.
My opinion is this that 'ere wolf is a 'idin' of, somewheres.
If there ain't old bersicker come back by 'isself!
The whole scene was an unutterable mixture of comedy and pathos.
Here's his head all cut and full of broken glass.
E's been a gettin' over some bloomin' wall or other.
It's a shyme that people are allowed to top their walls with broken bottles.
This 'ere's what comes of it.
Without an instant's pause he made straight at me.
My wrist bled freely, and quite a little pool trickled on to the carpet.
The blood is the life!
I am over excited and weary, and i need rest, rest, rest.
Telegram, van helsing, antwerp, to seward, carfax.
Do not fail to be at hillingham to night.
Shall be with you as soon as possible after arrival.
Just off for train to london.
The arrival of van helsing's telegram filled me with dismay.
Of course it is possible that all may be well, but what may have happened?
Memorandum left by lucy westenra.
This is an exact record of what took place to night.
I tried to go to sleep, but could not.
I was afraid to wake mother, and so closed my door again.
So i went back to bed again, but determined not to go to sleep.
She was startled and a little frightened, and cried out what is that?
The room and all round seemed to spin round.
The time did not seem long, but very, very awful, till i recovered consciousness again.
The wind rushed in through the broken window, and the door slammed to.
The door flew open for an instant and closed again.
I was surprised that the maids did not come back.
My heart sank when i saw what had happened.
They all four lay helpless on the floor, breathing heavily.
I was suspicious, and examined the decanter.
I am back in the room with mother.
God shield me from harm this night!
It is time that i go too.
Good bye, dear arthur, if i should not survive this night.
God keep you, dear, and god help me!
I drove at once to hillingham and arrived early.
Keeping my cab at the gate, i went up the avenue alone.
After a while, finding no response, i knocked and rang again still no answer.
Was it indeed a house of death to which i had come, too late?
I could find no means of ingress.
Every window and door was fastened and locked, and i returned baffled to the porch.
When he saw me, he gasped out then it was you, and just arrived.
Did you not get my telegram?
With his usual recuperative energy, he went on come.
If there be no way open to get in, we must make one.
Time is all in all to us now.
We went round to the back of the house, where there was a kitchen window.
I attacked them at once and had very soon cut through three of them.
I helped the professor in, and followed him.
Then we ascended to lucy's room.
With white faces and trembling hands, we opened the door gently, and entered the room.
How shall i describe what we saw?
On the bed lay two women, lucy and her mother.
By her side lay lucy, with face white and still more drawn.
I did not stay to make sure, but returned to van helsing.
He said to me i can do this, all that can be at the present.
You go wake those maids.
Flick them in the face with a wet towel, and flick them hard.
Make them get heat and fire and a warm bath.
This poor soul is nearly as cold as that beside her.
She will need be heated before we can do anything more.
I went at once, and found little difficulty in waking three of the women.
I was stern with them, however, and would not let them talk.
Whilst we were busy chafing her limbs there was a knock at the hall door.
One of the maids ran off, hurried on some more clothes, and opened it.
I never saw in all my experience the professor work in such deadly earnest.
He went on with his work with, if possible, renewed and more frenzied vigour.
I noticed that van helsing tied a soft silk handkerchief round her throat.
The room was, therefore, dimly dark.
It was, however, light enough for our purposes.
Van helsing's sternness was somewhat relieved by a look of perplexity.
Where are we to turn for help?
You are exhausted already i am exhausted too.
I fear to trust those women, even if they would have courage to submit.
What are we to do for some one who will open his veins for her?
What's the matter with me, anyhow?
And rushed towards him with outstretched hands.
I cried as our hands met.
I guess art is the cause.
Father still in same condition.
Send me word how lucy is.
I think i came just in the nick of time.
You know you have only to tell me what to do.
You're a man and no mistake.
Once again we went through that ghastly operation.
I have not the heart to go through with the details.
Her struggle back into life was something frightful to see and hear.
Her faint became a profound slumber.
Was she, or is she, mad or what sort of horrible danger is it?
I was so bewildered that i did not know what to say more.
Forget it for the present.
You shall know and understand it all in good time but it will be later.
And now what is it that you came to me to say?
This brought me back to fact, and i was all myself again.
I came to speak about the certificate of death.
Good, oh my friend john!
One, two, three, all open their veins for her, besides one old man.
Ah yes, i know, friend john i am not blind!
I love you all the more for it!
I nodded in reply and went out.
When i got back quincey was waiting for me.
What is it that's wrong with her?
But this is no common matter, and, whatever it is, i have done my part.
And i guess art was in it too.
When i saw him four days ago down at his own place he looked queer.
As he spoke the poor fellow looked terribly anxious.
And how long has this been going on?
Man alive, her whole body wouldn't hold it.
That, i said, is the crux.
Van helsing is simply frantic about it, and i am at my wits' end.
I can't even hazard a guess.
But these shall not occur again.
Here we stay until all be well or ill. quincey held out his hand.
Count me in, he said.
You and the dutchman will tell me what to do, and i'll do it.
Her eye then lit on van helsing and on me too, and gladdened.
Towards dusk she fell into a doze.
Here a very odd thing occurred.
Whilst still asleep she took the paper from her breast and tore it in two.
Van helsing stepped over and took the pieces from her.
When the day came, its searching light showed the ravages in poor lucy's strength.
In the afternoon she asked for arthur, and we telegraphed for him.
Quincey went off to meet him at the station.
It was now nearly one o'clock, and he and van helsing are sitting with her.
Until six o'clock they are to try to rest.
Letter, mina harker to lucy westenra.
Now i want you to make your home here with me.
I cried, lucy dear, as jonathan and the old man clasped hands.
Our evening was a very, very happy one.
I am busy, i need not tell you, arranging things and housekeeping.
How is your dear mother getting on?
And now i have told you my news, let me ask yours.
Good bye, my dearest lucy, and all blessings on you.
I found him, to my astonishment, quite composed and most genial in his manner.
You know i am no light weight, and the others were both burly men.
They shan't murder me by inches!
I'll fight for my lord and master!
And all sorts of similar incoherent ravings.
One of the attendants, hardy, had a finger broken.
However, i set it all right and he is going on well.
I took their names and addresses, in case they might be needed.
Believe me, dear sir, yours faithfully, patrick hennessey.
Letter, mina harker to lucy westenra .
My dearest lucy, such a sad blow has befallen us.
Mr. hawkins has died very suddenly.
He says the amount of responsibility which it puts upon him makes him nervous.
He begins to doubt himself.
As there are no relations at all, jonathan will have to be chief mourner.
Forgive me for troubling you.
With all blessings, your loving mina harker.
Only resolution and habit can let me make an entry to night.
I duly relieved van helsing in his watch over lucy.
We wanted arthur to go to rest also, but he refused at first.
Van helsing was very kind to him.
Come, my child, he said come with me.
I sat down by her, and presently she moved uneasily.
I went over to it softly, and peeped out by the corner of the blind.
I replaced them as well as i could, and sat watching her.
Presently she woke, and i gave her food, as van helsing had prescribed.
She took but a little, and that languidly.
At six o'clock van helsing came to relieve me.
Arthur had then fallen into a doze, and he mercifully let him sleep on.
Then he bent down, and, with his face almost touching lucy's, examined her carefully.
He removed the flowers and lifted the silk handkerchief from her throat.
As he did so he started back, and i could hear his ejaculation, mein gott!
As it was smothered in his throat.
The wounds on the throat had absolutely disappeared.
Then he turned to me and said calmly she is dying.
It will not be long now.
It will be much difference, mark me, whether she dies conscious or in her sleep.
I went to the dining room and waked him.
I took him by the hand and raised him up.
Oh, my love, i am so glad you have come!
He was stooping to kiss her, when van helsing motioned him back.
No, he whispered, not yet!
Hold her hand it will comfort her more.
Then gradually her eyes closed, and she sank to sleep.
And then insensibly there came the strange change which i had noticed in the night.
He said not for your living soul and hers!
And he stood between them like a lion at bay.
Then her eyes closed, and she breathed heavily.
Oh, guard him, and give me peace!
Their eyes met instead of their lips and so they parted.
And then lucy's breathing became stertorous again, and all at once it ceased.
It is all over, said van helsing.
Some change had come over her body.
We thought her dying whilst she slept, and sleeping when she died.
He turned to me, and said with grave solemnity not so alas!
It is only the beginning!
Chapter xiii dr. seward's diary continued .
It's quite a privilege to attend on her.
It's not too much to say that she will do credit to our establishment!
I noticed that van helsing never kept far away.
This was possible from the disordered state of things in the household.
Under the circumstances, van helsing and i took it upon ourselves to examine papers, etc.
He insisted upon looking over lucy's papers himself.
He answered me i know i know.
You forget that i am a lawyer as well as a doctor.
But this is not altogether for the law.
You knew that, when you avoided the coroner.
I have more than him to avoid.
There may be papers more such as this.
It is not well that her very thoughts go into the hands of strangers.
I am free, and if i may, my service is to you.
Have you got what you looked for?
I asked, to which he replied i did not look for any specific thing.
But i have them here, and we shall for the present say nothing of them.
We want sleep, both you and i, and rest to recuperate.
Before turning in we went to look at poor lucy.
The professor looked sternly grave.
He said to me remain till i return, and left the room.
He restored the sheet to its place, and we came away.
Must we make an autopsy?
I want to operate, but not as you think.
Let me tell you now, but not a word to another.
I want to cut off her head and take out her heart.
You a surgeon, and so shocked!
But why do it at all?
Why mutilate her poor body without need?
Without such it is monstrous.
If i could, i would take on myself the burden that you do bear.
I may err i am but man but i believe in all i do.
Well, i have good reason now for all i want to do.
Believe me yet a little, friend john.
So lonely when i want all help and courage that may be!
Let us not be two, but one, that so we work to a good end.
Will you not have faith in me?
I took his hand, and promised him.
For his solemnity of the night before had greatly impressed me.
Because, he said sternly, it is too late or too early.
Here he held up the little golden crucifix.
This was stolen in the night.
How, stolen, i asked in wonder, since you have it now?
Of course, we had then no alternative but to accept.
I assure you, my dear sirs, i am rejoiced at the result, perfectly rejoiced.
It was so in very truth, for now both mother and daughter lay in it.
The professor noticed it, too, and motioned me to bring him upstairs.
I don't know how to thank you for all you have done for her.
I comforted him as well as i could.
In such cases men do not need much expression.
Together we moved over to the bed, and i lifted the lawn from her face.
Every hour seemed to be enhancing her loveliness.
He came away, fondly looking back over his shoulder at her as he came.
Just now i doubted for a moment myself!
Not yet at any rate.
The professor answered very sweetly i only used that name because i was in doubt.
Arthur held out his hand, and took the old man's warmly.
Call me what you will, he said.
I hope i may always have the title of a friend.
And, indeed, indeed, sir, said arthur warmly, i shall in all ways trust you.
You shall do what you like.
You know that mrs. westenra left you all her property?
No, poor dear i never thought of it.
I want you to give me permission to read all miss lucy's papers and letters.
Believe me, it is no idle curiosity.
I have a motive of which, be sure, she would have approved.
I have them all here.
I shall not trouble you with questions till the time comes.
The old professor stood up as he said solemnly and you are right.
I slept on a sofa in arthur's room that night.
Van helsing did not go to bed at all.
In the train to exeter.
Some day he may ask me about it.
The service was very simple and very solemn.
Jonathan kept staring at him, till i was afraid he would notice.
I feared he might take it ill, he looked so fierce and nasty.
No, dear, i said i don't know him who is it?
My god, if this be so!
I drew him away quietly, and he, holding my arm, came easily.
I thought it was the best thing for him, so did not disturb him.
Oh, do forgive me for being so rude.
Come, and we'll have a cup of tea somewhere.
They were both buried to day.
Oh, what a wealth of sorrow in a few words!
Gone, gone, never to return to us!
And poor, poor arthur, to have lost such sweetness out of his life!
God help us all to bear our troubles.
Arthur has gone back to ring, and has taken quincey morris with him.
What a fine fellow is quincey!
Van helsing is lying down, having a rest preparatory to his journey.
Men and women are so different in manifestations of nervous strength or weakness!
He said ah, you don't comprehend, friend john.
Do not think that i am not sad, though i laugh.
See, i have cried even when the laugh did choke me.
Is not the true laughter.
He is a king, and he come when and how he like.
He ask no person he choose no time of suitability.
He say, 'i am here.
To my heart, till it send back the blood from my cheek.
There, you know now why i love him so.
And believe me, friend john, that he is good to come, and kind.
Why, your explanation makes it a harder puzzle than before.
But even if the burial service was comic, what about poor art and his trouble?
Why, his heart was simply breaking.
Yes, and it was a sweet and comforting idea for him.
But there was a difficulty, friend john.
If so that, then what about the others?
I don't see where the joke comes in there either!
I said and i did not feel particularly pleased with him for saying such things.
I was touched by the tenderness of his tone, and asked why.
It was terribly weak, and looked quite emaciated.
Jonathan is better after a bad night.
How he must have suffered, whether it be true or only imagination.
I wonder if there is any truth in it at all.
He seemed quite certain of him.... poor fellow!
He believes it all himself.
If it should be, and he came to london, with his teeming millions....
I shall get my typewriter this very hour and begin transcribing.
Then we shall be ready for other eyes if required.
Letter, van helsing to mrs. harker.
Oh, madam mina, by that love, i implore you, help me.
May it be that i see you?
I am friend of dr. john seward and of lord godalming .
I must keep it private for the present from all.
I implore your pardon, madam.
Again your pardon, and forgive me.
Telegram, mrs. harker to van helsing.
Come to day by quarter past ten train if you can catch it.
Can see you any time you call.
Then i shall never know the real truth now!
Of course it is about lucy.
I had almost forgotten in my own affairs how ill she was afterwards.
It is two o'clock, and the doctor will be here soon now.
I shall say nothing of jonathan's journal unless he asks me.
He has come and gone.
Oh, what a strange meeting, and how it all makes my head whirl round!
I feel like one in a dream.
Can it be all possible, or even a part of it?
How he must have suffered.
Please the good god, all this may not upset him again.
Here was a rare interview i shall try to record it verbatim .
It was half past two o'clock when the knock came.
I took my courage à deux mains and waited.
In a few minutes mary opened the door, and announced dr. van helsing.
He said to me mrs. harker, is it not?
That was miss mina murray?
Madam mina, it is on account of the dead i come.
And i held out my hand.
I know that you were with her at whitby.
I can tell you, i think, dr. van helsing, all about it.
Ah, then you have good memory for facts, for details?
It is not always so with young ladies.
No, doctor, but i wrote it all down at the time.
I can show it to you if you like.
Oh, madam mina, i will be grateful you will do me much favour.
He took it with a grateful bow, and said may i read it?
If you wish, i answered as demurely as i could.
He opened it, and for an instant his face fell.
Then he stood up and bowed.
Oh, you so clever woman!
I know not the shorthand.
He took it and his eyes glistened.
You are so good, he said.
And may i read it now?
I may want to ask you some things when i have read.
He rushed up to me and took me by both hands.
Oh, madam mina, he said, how can i say what i owe to you?
This paper is as sunshine.
It opens the gate to me.
But that you do not, cannot, comprehend.
Oh, but i am grateful to you, you so clever woman.
There are darknesses in life, and there are lights you are one of the lights.
But, doctor, you praise me too much, and and you do not know me.
And your husband tell me of him.
Is all that fever gone, and is he strong and hearty?
He interrupted oh, yes, i know, i know.
I have read your last two letters.
A shock, and after brain fever so soon!
What kind of a shock was it?
And here the whole thing seemed to overwhelm me in a rush.
You are overwrought and perhaps over anxious.
Therefore for his sake you must eat and smile.
You must eat now afterwards you shall tell me all.
Thank you, thank you, a thousand times!
You have taken a weight off my mind.
If you will let me, i shall give you a paper to read.
It is long, but i have typewritten it out.
It will tell you my trouble and jonathan's.
It is the copy of his journal when abroad, and all that happened.
I dare not say anything of it you will read for yourself and judge.
Letter , van helsing to mrs. harker.
Dear madam mina, i have read your husband's so wonderful diary.
You may sleep without doubt.
Strange and terrible as it is, it is true !
I will pledge my life on it.
It may be worse for others but for him and you there is no dread.
I shall have much to ask him of other things.
Yours the most faithful, abraham van helsing.
Letter, mrs. harker to van helsing.
Believe me, your faithful and grateful friend, mina harker.
I thought never to write in this diary again, but the time has come.
She showed me in the doctor's letter that all i wrote down was true.
It seems to have made a new man of me.
I felt impotent, and in the dark, and distrustful.
But, now that i know , i am not afraid, even of the count.
He has got younger, and how?
We sat late, and talked it all over.
He was, i think, surprised to see me.
By your letter to mina last night.
The groove ceased to avail me, and i mistrusted myself.
Doctor, you don't know what it is to doubt everything, even yourself.
No, you don't you couldn't with eyebrows like yours.
He seemed pleased, and laughed as he said so!
I learn more here with each hour.
You will give me your hand, will you not?
And let us be friends for all our lives.
And now, he said, may i ask you for some more help?
I have a great task to do, and at the beginning it is to know.
You can help me here.
Can you tell me what went before your going to transylvania?
Look here, sir, i said, does what you have to do concern the count?
It does, he said solemnly.
Then i am with you heart and soul.
You can take them with you and read them in the train.
After breakfast i saw him to the station.
We shall both come when you will, i said.
He read something intently, groaning to himself mein gott!
I do not think he remembered me at the moment.
Just then the whistle blew, and the train moved off.
Truly there is no such thing as finality.
Until this afternoon i had no cause to think of what is done.
Renfield had become, to all intents, as sane as he ever was.
Everything is, however, now reopened and what is to be the end god only knows.
He went to exeter yesterday, and stayed there all night.
What do you think of that?
He asked as he stood back and folded his arms.
An idea struck me, and i looked up.
It is like poor lucy's.
And what do you make of it?
Simply that there is some cause in common.
Whatever it was that injured her has injured them.
I did not quite understand his answer that is true indirectly, but not directly.
How do you mean, professor?
I can hazard no opinion.
Of nervous prostration following on great loss or waste of blood.
And how the blood lost or waste?
I suppose now you do not believe in corporeal transference.
Nor in the reading of thought.
Nor in hypnotism yes, i said.
Charcot has proved that pretty well.
He smiled as he went on then you are satisfied as to it.
Into the very soul of the patient that he influence.
There are always mysteries in life.
For, had she live one more day, we could have save her.
Do you know all the mystery of life and death?
Tell me the thesis, so that i may apply your knowledge as you go on.
That is good image, he said.
Well, i shall tell you.
My thesis is this i want you to believe.
To believe in things that you cannot.
For one, i follow that man.
We get the small truth first.
Do i read your lesson aright?
Ah, you are my favourite pupil still.
It is worth to teach you.
Now that you are willing to understand, you have taken the first step to understand.
He stood up and said solemnly then you are wrong.
Oh, would it were so!
It is worse, far, far worse.
In god's name, professor van helsing, what do you mean?
Chapter xv dr. seward's diary continued .
Madness were easy to bear compared with truth like this.
Was it because i hate you and have hated you all my life?
Was it because i wished to give you pain?
But even yet i do not expect you to believe.
To night i go to prove it.
Dare you come with me?
And prove the very truth he most abhorred.
He will let two scientists see his case, if he will not let two friends.
We shall tell him nothing, but only that we wish to learn.
He took a key from his pocket and held it up.
And then we spend the night, you and i, in the churchyard where lucy lies.
This is the key that lock the tomb.
I had it from the coffin man to give to arthur.
It had had a sleep and taken some food, and altogether was going on well.
Dr. vincent took the bandage from its throat, and showed us the punctures.
There was no mistaking the similarity to those which had been on lucy's throat.
They were smaller, and the edges looked fresher that was all.
These things do occur, you know.
But in any case i suppose you will not let it away for some days?
Certainly not, not for a week at least longer if the wound is not healed.
When van helsing saw how dark it was, he said there is no hurry.
It is more late than i thought.
About ten o'clock we started from the inn.
At last we reached the wall of the churchyard, which we climbed over.
In the latter case we should have been in a bad plight.
Van helsing went about his work systematically.
Another search in his bag, and he took out a turnscrew.
You shall yet be convinced.
The sight was almost too much for me.
I had expected a rush of gas from the week old corpse.
I drew near and looked.
Are you satisfied now, friend john?
And what is that, friend john?
That it is not there.
That is good logic, he said, so far as it goes.
But how do you how can you account for it not being there?
Perhaps a body snatcher, i suggested.
Some of the undertaker's people may have stolen it.
He said, we must have more proof.
We opened the door, and went out.
Behind us he closed the door and locked it.
He handed me the key, saying will you keep it?
You had better be assured.
He said nothing, but put the key in his pocket.
It was a lonely vigil.
The sky was overcast, and somewhere far off an early cock crew.
No, i said, in a way that i felt was aggressive.
Do you not see the child?
Yes, it is a child, but who brought it here?
It was without a scratch or scar of any kind.
We were just in time, said the professor thankfully.
We heard his exclamation of astonishment, and then we went away silently.
By good chance we got a cab near the spaniards, and drove to town.
I cannot sleep, so i make this entry.
He insists that i shall go with him on another expedition.
It was two o'clock before we found a suitable opportunity for our attempt.
Besides, i felt it was all so useless.
He took the key, opened the vault, and again courteously motioned me to precede.
Van helsing walked over to lucy's coffin, and i followed.
There lay lucy, seemingly just as we had seen her the night before her funeral.
See, he went on, see, they are even sharper than before.
Are you of belief now, friend john?
Once more, argumentative hostility woke within me.
That is so, and by whom?
Some one has done it.
And yet she has been dead one week.
Most peoples in that time would not look so.
I had no answer for this, so was silent.
In trance she died, and in trance she is un dead, too.
So it is that she differ from all other.
I answered do not press me too hard all at once.
I am willing to accept.
How will you do this bloody work?
And yet the feeling was not so strong as i had expected.
Is it possible that love is all subjective, or all objective?
He doubted me when i took him from her kiss when she was dying.
Yet he never can be sure and that is the worst of all.
I told him once, and since then i learn much.
My mind is made up.
You return home for to night to your asylum, and see that all be well.
Later we shall all have work to do.
Friend john, i write this in case anything should happen.
I go alone to watch in that churchyard.
She is young as un dead, and will heed.
Besides, he can summon his wolf and i know not what.
But it may be that he will not attempt the place.
If it be so, farewell.
It is wonderful what a good night's sleep will do for one.
I have no doubt that he believes it all.
I wonder if his mind can have become in any way unhinged.
Surely there must be some rational explanation of all these mysterious things.
Is it possible that the professor can have done it himself?
I may get some light on the mystery.
You were doubtless surprised at my letter?
This query was directly addressed to lord godalming.
It rather upset me for a bit.
I have been curious, too, as to what you mean.
Me too, said quincey morris laconically.
That's frank anyhow, broke in quincey.
I'll answer for the professor.
I thank you, sir, said van helsing proudly.
He held out a hand, which quincey took.
Said arthur that is only fair.
Arthur went on and when there?
Professor, are you in earnest or it is some monstrous joke?
Pardon me, i see that you are in earnest.
There was silence until he asked again and when in the tomb?
He said, angrily rising again.
The professor looked pityingly at him.
Arthur looked up with set white face and said take care, sir, take care!
Would it not be well to hear what i have to say?
And then you will at least know the limit of my purpose.
That's fair enough, broke in morris.
Then there can be no wrong to her.
But if she be not dead arthur jumped to his feet.
Has there been any mistake has she been buried alive?
He groaned in anguish that not even hope could soften.
I did not say she was alive, my child i did not think it.
I go no further than to say that she might be un dead.
Is this all a nightmare, or what is it?
Believe me, we are now on the verge of one.
But i have not done.
May i cut off the head of dead miss lucy?
Cried arthur in a storm of passion.
Not for the wide world will i consent to any mutilation of her dead body.
Dr. van helsing, you try me too far.
What have i done to you that you should torture me so?
Are you mad that speak such things, or am i mad to listen to them?
For why should i give myself so much of labour and so much of sorrow?
The rest of us followed, and he closed the door.
He then lit a dark lantern and pointed to the coffin.
Arthur stepped forward hesitatingly van helsing said to me you were with me here yesterday.
Was the body of miss lucy in that coffin?
He took his screwdriver and again took off the lid of the coffin.
Arthur looked on, very pale but silent when the lid was removed he stepped forward.
Van helsing forced back the leaden flange, and we all looked in and recoiled.
For several minutes no one spoke a word.
The silence was broken by quincey morris professor, i answered for you.
Your word is all i want.
We then waited, and saw something white come through the trees.
The next day we came here in day time, and she lay there.
Did she not, friend john?
That night we were just in time.
Yesterday i came here before sundown, for at sundown the un dead can move.
I waited here all the night till the sun rose, but i saw nothing.
And so it is we find this coffin empty.
So far there is much that is strange.
So here he shut the dark slide of his lantern now to the outside.
Each in his own way was solemn and overcome.
As to van helsing, he was employed in a definite way.
He crumbled the wafer up fine and worked it into the mass between his hands.
Arthur and quincey drew near also, as they too were curious.
He answered i am closing the tomb, so that the un dead may not enter.
And is that stuff you have put there going to do it?
What is that which you are using?
This time the question was by arthur.
Van helsing reverently lifted his hat as he answered the host.
I brought it from amsterdam.
I pitied the others, especially arthur.
It was now near enough for us to see clearly, and the moonlight still held.
Lucy westenra, but yet how changed.
The sweetness was turned to adamantine, heartless cruelty, and the purity to voluptuous wantonness.
I could see by the tremulous light that even van helsing's iron nerve had failed.
Oh, god, how it made me shudder to see it!
The child gave a sharp cry, and lay there moaning.
She still advanced, however, and with a languorous, voluptuous grace, said come to me, arthur.
Leave these others and come to me.
My arms are hungry for you.
Come, and we can rest together.
Van helsing broke the silence by asking arthur answer me, oh my friend!
Am i to proceed in my work?
There can be no horror like this ever any more and he groaned in spirit.
Quincey and i simultaneously moved towards him, and took his arms.
Then there is more to do but not like this of to night.
You are now in the bitter waters, my child.
Till then i shall not ask you to forgive me.
He unlocked the door, and we entered, closing it behind us.
I could see even arthur's face grow hard as he looked.
It is her body, and yet not it.
But wait a while, and you all see her as she was, and is.
They both, however, kept their courage, and remained silent and quiet.
The career of this so unhappy dear lady is but just begun.
Tell me if there be such a one amongst us?
We all looked at arthur.
Tell me what i am to do, and i shall not falter!
Van helsing laid a hand on his shoulder, and said brave lad!
A moment's courage, and it is done.
This stake must be driven through her.
But you must not falter when once you have begun.
Go on, said arthur hoarsely.
Tell me what i am to do.
Then he struck with all his might.
The terrible task was over.
The hammer fell from arthur's hand.
He reeled and would have fallen had we not caught him.
No longer she is the devil's un dead.
She is god's true dead, whose soul is with him!
Then we cut off the head and filled the mouth with garlic.
When the professor locked the door he gave the key to arthur.
Shall you not all help me?
We have learned to believe, all of us is it not so?
And since so, do we not see our duty?
And do we not promise to go on to the bitter end?
Each in turn, we took his hand, and the promise was made.
To night i leave for amsterdam, but shall return to morrow night.
And then begins our great quest.
Ah, that wonderful madam mina, he said, pearl among women!
She arrive, but i cannot stay.
She must go to your house, friend john.
You must meet her at the station.
Telegraph her en route , so that she may be prepared.
Take these, he said, and study them well.
Keep them safe, for there is in them much of treasure.
You have kept diary of all these so strange things is it not so?
Then we shall go through all these together when we meet.
He then made ready for his departure, and shortly after drove off to liverpool street.
And you are mrs. harker!
I answered at once whereupon she held out her hand.
In due time we arrived.
So here i am finishing my entry in my phonograph diary whilst i await her.
I must be careful not to frighten her.
After i had tidied myself, i went down to dr. seward's study.
To my intense surprise, there was no one with him.
I had never seen one, and was much interested.
Oh, he replied with a smile, i was only entering my diary.
I asked him in surprise.
I keep it in this.
As he spoke he laid his hand on the phonograph.
I felt quite excited over it, and blurted out why, this beats even shorthand!
May i hear it say something?
Certainly, he replied with alacrity, and stood up to put it in train for speaking.
Then he paused, and a troubled look overspread his face.
She was very, very dear to me.
Not for the wide world!
I asked, for some grave, terrible feeling was coming over me.
Again he paused, and i could see that he was trying to invent an excuse.
I could not but smile, at which he grimaced.
I gave myself away that time!
He grew to a positively deathly pallor as he said no!
For all the world, i wouldn't let you know that terrible story!
Then it was terrible my intuition was right!
His eyes caught the look in mine, and, without his thinking, followed their direction.
As they saw the parcel he realised my meaning.
You do not know me, i said.
He is certainly a man of noble nature poor dear lucy was right about him.
I did not trust you because i did not know you.
I know that lucy told you of me she told me of you too.
May i make the only atonement in my power?
Dinner will by then be ready.
He carried the phonograph himself up to my sitting room and adjusted it for me.
I had just finished mrs. harker's diary, when she came in.
She looked sweetly pretty, but very sad, and her eyes were flushed with crying.
This somehow moved me much.
Of late i have had cause for tears, god knows!
So i said as gently as i could i greatly fear i have distressed you.
That is a wonderful machine, but it is cruelly true.
It told me, in its very tones, the anguish of your heart.
It was like a soul crying out to almighty god.
No one must hear them spoken ever again!
See, i have tried to be useful.
No one need ever know, shall ever know, i said in a low voice.
She laid her hand on mine and said very gravely ah, but they must!
You will let me help, will you not?
Jonathan and i have been working day and night since professor van helsing saw us.
You shall, i said, do as you like in the matter.
God forgive me if i do wrong!
Nay, the end the very end may give you a gleam of peace.
After dinner i came with dr. seward to his study.
He brought back the phonograph from my room, and i took my typewriter.
I put the forked metal to my ears and listened.
Fortunately i am not of a fainting disposition.
We must be ready for dr. van helsing when he comes.
You tell me that lord godalming and mr. morris are coming too.
Let us be able to tell him when they come.
I am not sleepy, and the work will help to keep me quiet.
Mr. harker arrived at nine o'clock.
He had got his wife's wire just before starting.
He is uncommonly clever, if one can judge from his face, and full of energy.
That going down to the vault a second time was a remarkable piece of daring.
They are hard at it.
He is now reading his wife's typescript of my diary.
I wonder what they make out of it.
Goodness knows that we had enough clues from the conduct of the patient renfield!
The bundle of letters relating to the purchase of the house were with the typescript.
Oh, if we had only had them earlier we might have saved poor lucy!
Stop that way madness lies!
Harker has gone back, and is again collating his material.
What a good thing that mrs. harker put my cylinders into type!
We never could have found the dates otherwise....
I found renfield sitting placidly in his room with his hands folded, smiling benignly.
At the moment he seemed as sane as any one i ever saw.
In fact, he spoke quite confidently of getting his discharge at once.
As it is, i am darkly suspicious.
All those outbreaks were in some way linked with the proximity of the count.
What then does this absolute content mean?
Can it be that his instinct is satisfied as to the vampire's ultimate triumph?
This all seems confirmation of our idea.
He might begin to think, and then !
Later, we may be able to deal with it.
Everything had been carefully thought out, and done systematically and with precision.
But it ain't been touched sence a hundred years.
But the ole chapel that took the cike, that did!
Me and my mate, we thort we wouldn't never git out quick enough.
Lor', i wouldn't take less nor a quid a moment to stay there arter dark.
By following up this clue we may learn a good deal.
I am so glad that i hardly know how to contain myself.
The effort has, however, done him good.
I feel myself quite wild with excitement.
I suppose one ought to pity any thing so hunted as is the count.
That is just it this thing is not human not even beast.
Lord godalming and mr. morris arrived earlier than we expected.
I gave them each a copy to read in the library.
I could hear the tears in his voice.
I sat down beside him and took his hand.
There i wrong him i know he never will he is too true a gentleman.
I know what sorrows you have had, though i cannot measure the depth of them.
In an instant the poor dear fellow was overwhelmed with grief.
He stood up and then sat down again, and the tears rained down his cheeks.
I felt an infinite pity for him, and opened my arms unthinkingly.
I never thought at the time how strange it all was.
For dear lucy's sake, i said as we clasped hands.
As i came along the corridor i saw mr. morris looking out of a window.
He turned as he heard my footsteps.
He bore his own trouble so bravely that my heart bled for him.
You will know, later on, why i speak.
Then he went into the study to his friend.
When we had finished, mrs. harker said dr. seward, may i ask a favour?
I want to see your patient, mr. renfield.
Do let me see him.
What you have said of him in your diary interests me so much!
It was quite evident that he feared, or was jealous of, some interference.
She walked over to him, smiling pleasantly, and held out her hand.
Good evening, mr. renfield, said she.
You see, i know you, for dr. seward has told me of you.
You can't be, you know, for she's dead.
Mrs. harker smiled sweetly as she replied oh no!
Then what are you doing here?
My husband and i are staying on a visit with dr. seward.
I don't see that at all, mr. renfield, said mrs. harker, at once championing me.
I positively opened my eyes at this new development.
Why, i myself am an instance of a man who had a strange belief.
I pray god i may never see your sweet face again.
May he bless and keep you!
Van helsing stepped from the carriage with the eager nimbleness of a boy.
I have been busy, for i come here to stay if need be.
All affairs are settled with me, and i have much to tell.
Madam mina is with you?
And her so fine husband?
And arthur and my friend quincey, they are with you, too?
It is not good that she run a risk so great.
We men are determined nay, are we not pledged?
To destroy this monster but it is no part for a woman.
He was amazed, and a great concern seemed to come on him.
Oh that we had known it before!
He said, for then we might have reached him in time to save poor lucy.
However, 'the milk that is spilt cries not out afterwards,' as you say.
We shall not think of that, but go on our way to the end.
Then he fell into a silence that lasted till we entered my own gateway.
Not up to this moment, professor, she said impulsively, but up to this morning.
But why not up to now?
We have seen hitherto how good light all the little things have made.
It is my record of to day.
She took it back with another blush and a bright smile.
So we then can discuss how we shall act, and can take our measure according.
There are such beings as vampires some of us have evidence that they exist.
I admit that at the first i was sceptic.
The nosferatu do not die like the bee when he sting once.
He is only stronger and being stronger, have yet more power to work evil.
How then are we to begin our strike to destroy him?
How shall we find his where and having found it, how can we destroy?
Life is nothings i heed him not.
But to fail here, is not mere life or death.
But we are face to face with duty and in such case must we shrink?
Some have seen sorrow but there are fair days yet in store.
Whilst he was speaking, jonathan had taken my hand.
I answer for mina and myself, he said.
Count me in, professor, said mr. quincey morris, laconically as usual.
I am with you, said lord godalming, for lucy's sake, if for no other reason.
So as we all took hands our solemn compact was made.
All we have to go upon are traditions and superstitions.
Does not the belief in vampires rest for others though not, alas!
We even scouted a belief that we saw justified under our very eyes.
For, let me tell you, he is known everywhere that men have been.
But he cannot flourish without this diet he eat not as others.
He throws no shadow he make in the mirror no reflect, as again jonathan observe.
Ah, but hear me through.
He can do all these things, yet he is not free.
Only at certain times can he have limited freedom.
We have seen it with our eyes.
We have here much data, and we must proceed to lay out our campaign.
If the latter, we must trace here we were interrupted in a very startling way.
I am afraid i am at heart a coward, for i shrieked out.
As he did so we heard mr. morris's voice without sorry!
I fear i have alarmed you.
I shall come in and tell you about it.
You used to laugh at me for it then, art.
I don't know i fancy not, for it flew away into the wood.
And now for you, madam mina, this night is the end until all be well.
You are too precious to us to have such risk.
When we part to night, you no more must question.
We shall tell you all in good time.
Time is everything with him and swift action on our part may save another victim.
They have now gone off to carfax, with means to get into the house.
The attendant added he seems very importunate, sir.
I have never seen him so eager.
Take me with you, friend john, said the professor.
I should much like to see him, and especial when his mind is disturbed.
I nodded, and we all went down the passage together.
By the way, you have not introduced me.
Mr. morris, you should be proud of your great state.
What shall any man say of his pleasure at meeting van helsing?
Sir, i make no apology for dropping all forms of conventional prefix.
I think we were all staggered.
You have, i said frankly, but at the same time, as i felt, brutally.
Let me ask for this concession boon, privilege, what you will.
Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of your friends.
Again he looked at us all keenly.
He shook his head sadly, and with a look of poignant regret on his face.
The professor went on come, sir, bethink yourself.
I can only ask you to trust me.
If i am refused, the responsibility does not rest with me.
As, however, i got near the door, a new change came over the patient.
